Once a Week, Series 1, Volume I — Spontaneous generation


					George H. Lewes





1859





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





SPONTANEOUS GENERATION.





* * *



It was as easy for the ancients to conceive that animals could be produced from putrefying matters, as it is difficult for the instructed physiologist of our day to conceive any generation whatever except that by direct parentage. Aristotle found no difficulty in believing that worms and insects were generated by dead bodies, and that mice could become impregnated by licking salt. The successors of Aristotle were even less sceptical than he. They were constantly observing animals and plants suddenly springing into existence where no animals or plants had been before. Every dead dog, or decaying tree, was quickly beset with numerous forms of life; how could it be doubted that the putrefaction, which was observed as an invariable accompaniment, was the necessary cause of these sudden appearances of life?

To the mind imperfectly acquainted with the results of modern science, Spontaneous Generation is as easy of belief as it was to Aristotle. Do we not constantly see vegetable mould covering our cheese, our jam, our ink, our bread? Do we not, even in air-tight vessels, see plants and microscopic animals develop where no plants and animals could be seen before, and where, as we think, it was impossible that their seeds should have penetrated? And when we hear that Mr. Crosse produced an insect by means of electricity, startled as we may be, do we really find any better argument than our prejudice for disbelieving such a statement? Where do parasitic animals come from, if not spontaneously generated in the body? These parasites are found in the blood, in the liver, in the brain, in the eye, nay, even in the excessively minute egg itself. “How gat they there?” is our natural question. This question, which is so easily answered on the supposition that generation can take place spontaneously, presents the most serious difficulties to science, because the massive weight of scientific evidence has been year after year accumulating against such a supposition; until the majority of physiologists have come to regard it as an axiom, that no generation whatever can occur except by direct parentage. This axiom, which a small minority has always rejected, has quite recently met with a formidable questioner in M. Pouchet, the well-known physiologist of Rouen; and his experiments and arguments having agitated the Academy of Sciences, our readers may be interested if a review of the whole subject be laid before them.

The first person who assailed the notion of Spontaneous Generation was Redi, the excellent Italian naturalist, to whom we owe so many valuable observations. I have at this moment on my table the brief but pregnant treatise, “Experimenta circa Generationem Insectorum,” in which he reviewed the facts, and proved that the worms and insects which appear in decaying substances, are really developed from eggs deposited in those substances by the parents. So masterly was the treatise, that no one since then has had the courage to maintain the production of worms and insects spontaneously. It has been held as preposterous to suppose that putrefaction could generate an insect as that it could generate a mouse — which Cardan believed. Driven from the insect world, the hypothesis has sought refuge in the world of animalcules and parasites; and there the hypothesis is not so easily defeated. Who ever turns over the pages of old Leeuwenhoek, the first who extensively applied himself to microscopic observations, will see that the Dutchman steadily set his face against Spontaneous Generation, because the microscope showed him that many even of these minute animals had their eggs, and were generated like the larger animals. Since that time thousands of observers have brought their contributions to the general stock, and each extension of our knowledge has had the effect of narrowing the ground on which the “spontaneous” hypothesis could possibly find footing; the modes of generation of plants and animals are becoming more and more clearly traced; and the necessity in each case of a parent-stock is becoming more and more absolute. It is true that there are organic beings of which, as yet, we can only say that there is the strongest presumption against their being exceptions to the otherwise universal rule of generation. We do not know, for example, how the Amoeba arises; no one has ever seen its eggs; no one has ever seen its reproduction— and, what is more, it is perfectly easy to make them in any quantities. I have done so repeatedly. Nevertheless, they can only be “made” under the conditions which would be indispensable for their birth and development if they were really generated from eggs; and that they are so generated is a presumption which has every argument in its favour, except the direct evidence of the eggs themselves. The question then comes to this: Is it more probable that a law of generation which is found to reach over the whole organic world should have an exception, or that our researches have not yet been able to detect the evidence which would bring this seeming exception also under the law? One after the other, cases which seemed exceptions have turned out to be none at all ; one after the other, the various obscurities have been cleared away, showing one law to be general ; and it is therefore the dictate of philosophic caution which suggests that, so long as we remain in positive ignorance of the actual process, we must assume that in this case also the general law prevails.

Positive evidence would of course settle the dispute ; but every one who has made any experiments, or has attentively followed the experiments of others, will admit that it is excessively difficult to devise any experiment which shall be conclusive. The facts elicited admit of such different interpretations; the avenues by which error may enter are so numerous. I will not narrate here the experiments of Fray, Gruithuisen, Burdach, Baer, and others, since they cannot withstand serious discussion; nor -will I adduce my own, for the same reason. But those recently made by M. Pouchet have a more imposing character, and demand the strictest examination.

The reader will observe that the cardinal point in the investigation is to be certain that no organic germs could by any possibility be present in the liquid which is to produce the animalcules. On the hypothesis that the animalcules, like other animals and plants, are produced from germs, or eggs, these germs must be excessively minute, and easily overlooked. If they exist, it is in the water and the air, awaiting the proper conditions for their development. Supposing them to be floating about in the air, under the form of dust-like particles, they would fall into, or enter, any vessel containing organic matter in a state of decomposition, and there develope; as the deposited eggs of the insect developed in the decaying body of the dog. Now, inasmuch as the presence of atmospheric air is one of the indispensable conditions of vitality, and without it the animalcules could not develope and live, the initial difficulty is how to secure the presence of this air, and yet be sure that the air itself does not bring with it the germs of the animalcules which we find in the liquid. Schultze of Berlin devised an experiment which was thought to have finally settled this point, and to have refuted the hypothesis of Spon- taneous Generation. An account of this experi- ment, to be found in the “Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal” for October, 1837, shows that an infusion of organic substances, supplied with atmospheric air, but not with an air containing living germs, was suffered to remain thus from the end of May till the beginning of August; but, during the whole of that time, no plant or animal was developed in the infusion. The apparatus was now removed from the flask, atmospheric air was allowed to enter freely — without first passing through the acid or potass — and, in three days, the infusion was swarming with animalcules.

This really looked like a conclusive experiment. No sooner were measures taken which would destroy the germs, supposed to be suspended in the atmosphere, than the infusion was kept free from animalcules ; no sooner was the air allowed to enter the flask in the ordinary manner, than animalcules abounded. The proof did not, however, seem to me quite rigorous. It was by no means clear that the air in its passage through sulphuric acid would not suffer some alteration, perhaps electrical, affecting its vital properties; and this doubt seemed confirmed by the experiments of M. Morren, communicated to the French Academy, May 22, 1854; from which it appeared that air having passed through sulphuric acid was incompetent to sustain life, since the animalcules subject to it died in a few days. But M. Pouchet announces experiments which, if correct, not only scatter this doubt, and M. Mori on’s confirmation, but point-blank contradict the experiment of Schultze. He declares that in following Schultze’s experiment in every particular, and also in repeating it with fresh precautions, he can constantly exhibit animalcules and plants developed in an infusion in which every organic germ has been previously destroyed, and to which the air has only access after passing through concentrated sulphuric acid, or through a labyrinth of porcelain fragments at red-heat. Nay, M. Pouchet goes further. Feeling the difficulty of satisfying his opponents that the atmospheric air really contained no germs, he determined on substituting artificial air. This he did in conjunction with a chemist, M. Hongeau. Artificial air, as the reader knows, is simply a mixture of twenty-one parts of oxygen gas with seventy-nine parts of nitrogen gas. This air was introduced into a flask containing an infusion of hay, the hay having previously been subjected for twenty minutes to a heat of 100 degrees Centigrade (212 degrees Fahrenheit), a temperature which would destroy every germ. He thus guarded against the presence of any germs, or animalcules, in the infusion, or in the air. The whole was then hermetically sealed, so that no other air could gain access. In spite of these precautions cryptogamic plants and animalcules appeared in the infusion. M. Pouchet repeated the experiment with pure oxygen gas, instead of air; and with similar results.

In presence of such statements as these, only two courses were open to the antagonists of Spontaneous Generation. They could deny or disprove the facts; or they could argue that the precautions taken were not sufficiently rigorous to exclude the presence of germs. I have already said how difficult it is for the modern physiologist to admit Spontaneous Generation, and the reader will be therefore prepared to hear that M. Pouchet has roused immense opposition; but the opponents have not disputed his facts; one and all they accept the statements as he makes them, and, by criticism and counter-statement, endeavour to show that Spontaneous Generation is just as inadmissible as ever. These criticisms, and M. Pouchet's replies, may here be grouped in order, and with all possible brevity.

Milne-Edwards objected to the conclusions of M. Pouchet, saying:—There is no proof that the hay itself had been subjected to the temperature of 100 degrees Cent. (or the boiling point of water), it being very probable that although the furnace was at that heat, the hay, which was in a glass vessel and surrounded with air at rest, was not at anything like that temperature.

To this M. Pouchet replied, that he and M. Hougeau ascertained that the hay was at the temperature of 100 degrees, before they proceeded in their experiments.

Milne-Edwards is ready to grant that the temperature may have been reached, but argues that even that would not suffice for the destruction of all the germs, if they were perfectly dry. He refers to the observations of M. Doyère, which prove that the Tardigrada ("water bears," microscopic animals common in stagnant water), when thoroughly desiccated, preserve their power of reviving even after having been subjected to a temperature of 140 degrees Cent. (316 degrees Fahr.). If, therefore, animals of so complex a structure as these water-spiders can resist the action of so high a temperature, there is no reason for supposing that the germs of the simpler animalcules would be destroyed by it. Not content with this argument, which is sufficiently forcible, Milne-Edwards narrates an experiment of his own, which is very similar, both in method and results, to one I have performed. Unhappily, it is an experiment the value of which is either destroyed by the argument just adduced, or else it destroys the argument. It is this: In two tubes a little water containing organic matter is placed, one of them hermetically sealed, the other left open to the air. They are then placed in a bath of boiling water and kept there till their temperature has reached that point. After this they are left undisturbed for a few days. In the tube which was exposed to the air there were animalcules; in the tube which was excluded from the air, before the action of heat had destroyed all the germs, not an animalcule could be seen.

Is not this something like a proof? "Why, no, sir," as Johnson would have said. At least, not if the argument previously urged is worth anything. Because every one will see that if it be true, as Milne-Edwards maintains, that the temperature of boiling water is not by any means high enough to destroy the organic germs of animalcules, then it could not have destroyed those germs in the closed tube, and animalcules ought to have made their appearance there. If I could lay any particular stress on my own experiments (which I do not), they would lead to the conclusion that the organic germs do not resist the action of boiling water; for I found that a piece of fish divided into three, and placed in boiling water in three different tubes, one closed and excluded from the light, the second closed but exposed to the light, and the third open and exposed to the light, gave me no animalcules at all: had there been any germs in the water or meat, these must have been destroyed. But all such observations go for nothing in the presence of M. Pouchet's assertion that he had found animalcules in the infusion after subjecting the organic matters to a temperature of 250 degrees Cent. (546 degrees Fahr.), and this, too, with artificial water. Unless the germs are supposed to be incombustible, it is difficult, he says, to maintain, after this, that the animalcules were developed from germs.

Milne-Edwards being thus disposed of by M. Pouchet, let us see how M. Quatrefages will come off. He says, that having examined the dust remaining on the filter after some observations on rain water, he found that the organic elements presented a confused assemblage of particles; and this continued to be the case for a few minutes after their immersion in water. But a few hours afterwards, he detected a great number of vegetable spores, infusoria, and those minute spherical and ovoid bodies familiar to microscopists, which inevitably suggest the idea of eggs of extremely small dimensions. He also declares that he has frequently seen monads revive and move about after a few hours of immersion. The conclusion drawn is, that the air transports myriads of dust-like particles, which have only to fall into the water to appear in their true form as animalcules.

The reply of M. Pouchet is crushing. If the air is filled with animalcules and their eggs, they will of course fall into any vessel of water, and as water is their natural element, will there exhibit their vitality. But if half a dozen vessels of distilled water, perfectly free from animalcules, be left exposed to the air, beside one vessel of distilled water containing organic substances in decay, the half dozen will be free from animalcules and eggs, but the one will abound with them. Now, it is perfectly intelligible that inasmuch as organic matter is said to form the indispensable condition for the development of the eggs, it is only in the vessel containing such matter that the eggs will develops; but why are they not also visible as eggs in the other vessels? why are not the animalcules themselves visible there, as they were in the water examined by M. Quatrefages? If both eggs and animalcules are blown about like dust in the air, it is an immense stretch of credulity to believe they will only be blown into the vessel containing organic matter; but the opponents of Spontaneous Generation go further even than this, for they declare these dust-like animalcules will be blown into a closed vessel, if it contain organic matter, but not into several open vessels, if they only contain distilled water.

M. Quatrefages is on better ground when he rejects the evidence, long supposed to be so weighty, of parasitic animals. He refers to the modern investigations which have not only made the generation of these parasites intelligible, but in many cases have demonstrated it. M. Pouchet’a reply is feeble, and unworthy of a physiologist of his eminence. He doubts the truth of the results obtained in Germany, Italy, and Belgium: “the monopoly of which,” he adds, “has, by a strange anomaly, belonged to foreigners.” Because France has not the honour of this splendid discovery, the Frenchman begs to doubt its value! Every physiologist, however — not French — will be ready to admit that whereas the parasitic animals formerly furnished the advocates of Spontaneous Generation with their most striking illustrations, the investigations of Von Siebold, Van Beneden, Küchenmeister, Philippi, and others, have entirely changed the whole aspect of the question, and given the opponents of Spontaneous Generation new grounds for believing that in time all obscurities will be cleared away, all contradictions explained.

In conclusion, I must say that as far as regards the particular discussion, M. Pouchet seems to me to have the best of it. Their objections to his experiments are all set aside. If the facts are as he states them — and his antagonists at present do not dispute the facts — their criticisms go for very little. They have not shown it probable that any germs could have been present, under the conditions stated by him. Are we, then, to accept Spontaneous Generation as proven? By no means. It is very far from proven. The massive preponderance of fact and argument against such an hypothesis forces us to pause long before we accept it. What M. Pouchet has done is to destroy many of the arguments against Spontaneous Generation, and to have devised experiments which may finally lead to a conclusion. It is still on the cards that some source of error as yet overlooked vitiates his experiments; but until that error has been detected, he must be considered to have on his side the evidence of experiment, whereas we have on our side the massive evidence of extensive inductions. His experiment may be conclusive, and an exception to the general law will thereby be established But it may also, on further investigation, turn out to be illusory; some little oversight may be detected which will rob the experiment of all its force.

Perhaps you will ask why this suspicion should be entertained? Why ought we not to accept M. Pouchet’s statement with confidence, although it does contradict our inductions? The reason can only be, that the massive weight of these inductions naturally predisposes the mind to believe that it is more probable the experiment which contradicts them should be misconceived, than that they should be contradicted. Two years ago I became acquainted with an observation made by Cienkowski, the botanist, which seemed finally to settle this question of Spontaneous Generation, to place the fact beyond doubt, because it caught Nature in the act, so to speak, of spontaneously generating. Cienkowski’a statement is as follows: If a slice of raw potato be allowed to decompose in a little water, it will be found, after some days, that the starch grains have a peculiar border, bearing a strong resemblance to a cell-membrane. This shortly turns out to be a real cell-membrane, and is gradually raised above the starch-grain, which grain then occupies the position of a cell- nucleus. Thus, out of a grain of starch, a cell has been formed under the observer's eye. Inside this cell, little granular masses are developed, which begin to contract. Finally, minute eel- like animalcules are developed there, which bore their way through the cell-wall into the water.

Funke in his report of this observation, which he says, he has verified, asks, how is it possible to deny Spontaneous Generation here? Before our eyes a grain of starch becomes a cell, in that cell are developed living forms, which bore their way out.

The reader will imagine the sensation which such an observation created. He will agree with Funke, as I did, that if the fact were as he stated it, all discussion was at an end. But was the fact as stated? I tried in vain to verify it. Not less than twenty separate potatoes were employed, always in conjunction with ordinary starch, as a point of comparison; but although the animalcules were abundant enough, I never could satisfy myself of the first and all-important step, namely, the formation of a cell wall round the starch-grain. This was the more distressing, because it is at all times unpleasant to be unable to verify an observation, especially one made by a careful and competent observer, and described in precise terms.

I could not reject what Cienkowski had positively affirmed, and Funke positively confirmed, and was willing to suppose that there was some necessary condition in the observation which I had not fulfilled. On the other hand, I could not reject a doctrine on the strength of a fact about which any doubt was permissible. In this state of suspense I had the satisfaction of hearing from Professor Naegeli, the celebrated microscopist, that he too had been baffled at first in the attempt to verify this observation, but that, after nearly a hundred trials, he had succeeded. He positively confirmed all the statements Cienkowski had made. But, from that moment, my suspense vanished. If the phenomenon was of such rare occurrence, there were reasons for suspecting some other explanation than that of Spontaneous Generation. What the source of the error was might not be easily divined; but it seemed very probable that error had crept in somewhere.

In the last number of the Annales des Sciences Naturelles (x. 140), there is a note which clears up the whole mystery. Cienkowski has himself discovered the source of his own error. The membrane which seemed to form itself round the starch-grain has had quite another origin. He has observed the little monads swimming about, and has noticed one of them adhere to a starch-grain, spread its elastic body round it, and finally envelope it, as the Amœba wraps itself round its food. This explains how the starch-grain comes to be inside a cell; and as this process was never suspected, and the starch-grain was seen with a cell-wall, the idea of natural formation was inevitable, the more so, as the wall seemed to grow larger and larger.

Thus has even this, the most striking case in favour of Spontaneous Generation ever adduced, been finally cleared up; and the reader will probably agree in the conclusion to which the whole of the facts advanced in this paper lead, namely, that the Law of Generation is universal; the exceptions which have been hitherto urged have, one by one, been found to be no exceptions; and the presumption is that even M. Pouchet’s cases will be likewise explained. It is quite possible that the generation of animalcules may take place spontaneously; but although possible, it is not probable, and certainly is not proven.

George Henry Lewes





* * *





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

GinnevraD

Levana Taylor

Chrisguise

Sp1nd01





<EOS>Science and International Harmony


					Carl Schurz





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





REMARKS OF MR. SCHURZ.





Mr. Carl Schurz responded to the toast, “The progress of science tends to international harmony.” He said:

Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen: Two things which fell from the lips of the first two speakers struck me as remarkably pertinent to our present situation. One was the proverb of the Amazulus, quoted by our worthy chairman, that “a stuffed body sees not secret things”; and, great orator that he is, he did not fail to accompany the saying with the illustration of example. (Laughter.) The other was the remark which formed the text of the eloquent address of our honored guest, Mr. Spencer, that too great continuity and intensity of work, as observed in this country, will be apt to break down the best physical constitution; and I am exceedingly sorry to see that, in this respect, he himself appears more like an American than like an Englishman. (Great applause.) I sincerely hope that, when he returns to his country, he will permit his incessant labors for the benefit of humanity to be sometimes interrupted by due relaxation. (Applause.) Profiting from the wisdom we have listened to, I shall turn round the Amazulu proverb, and follow Mr. Spencer's impressive advice in saying that, in my opinion, and according to general experience, any serious effort at profound philosophical thought or scientific inquiry, immediately after a good dinner, must be injurious to a man's health. (Applause.) Considering that I have a family to support, and various other duties to perform, which make a vigorous physical condition desirable, I shall, whatever others may do, in this respect try to take care of myself. (Laughter.) Do not understand me, however, as meaning to discourage any one of you, gentlemen. Everybody must be left to be the judge of his own conduct, upon his own responsibility. Herbert Spencer never spoke a wiser word than when he said, “The ultimate result of shielding men from the effects of their folly is fill the world with” — he bluntly said — “fools,” but I will only say, “with dyspeptic philosophers.” (Laughter and applause.) Leaving, therefore, the discussion of deep philosophical and scientific problems to others more reckless of their physical well-being, I shall prefer to call up some pleasant memories which this interesting occasion brings to my mind. Nineteen years ago, shortly after the battle of Missionary Ridge, and an expedition to Knoxville for the relief of Burnside, I was with my command in a winter camp near Chattanooga, where, for some time, our horses suffered so much from want of food that many of them died, and where we had, at times, not salt enough to make our meat and crackers palatable. But I had Herbert Spencer's “Social Statics,” with me, which, in the long winter nights in my tent, I read by the light of a tallow-candle, and in which I found at least an abundance of mental salt to make up for the painful absence of the material article. (Applause.) For the delightful luxury of thus enjoying quiet philosophical meditation at the hand of such a guide, in the midst of the scenes of war, I have been grateful to Mr. Spencer ever since. (Applause.) Moreover, it became perfectly clear to my mind that, if the Southern people had well studied and thoroughly digested that book, there would never have been any war for the preservation of slavery (applause) — and that, since they had not read and digested it, it was our bounden duty to hammer the first principles of the “Social Statics” — namely, that “every man has freedom to do all that he wills, provided he infringes not the equal freedom of any other man” — (applause) — into the slaveholders' heads to the best of our ability. This was done, and the effect was good. (Applause.) That first principle is now more and more generally understood in this country, and the more generally it is appreciated the less occasion there will be for ourselves and our descendants to study the “Social Statics” in a camp of war again. (Applause.)

As I am supposed to respond to a sentiment touching the influence of the progress of science on the intercourse of nations, I may say that it strikes me as a common-sense view of the matter — and, as you know, Mr. Chairman, common-sense is often the most deceptive disguise of ignorance (laughter) — that the effect of that progress upon the relations of different peoples is very much the same that it is upon the relations of different portions of one people, or of different individuals. I shall not disregard my own warning as to the overstraining of our mental faculties immediately after dinner when I lay down the proposition that — given a certain number of subjects of discussion between different nations, or different individuals — if the progress of science, or of philosophical enlightenment, increases the number of things upon which they agree, it reduces, in the same measure, the number of things upon which they disagree (laughter); and thus it carries them forward in the direction of general good understanding and harmony. (Laughter and applause.) And if that progress, as is likely to be the case, increases the number of subjects of discussion, and teaches us, at the same time, how to dispose of them by peaceful and amicable reasoning, it will, to that extent, prevent us from coming to blows. (Applause.) These propositions, although simple, seem to me conclusive, and I feel very much like claiming for them the right of original discovery. (Laughter.)

I take it, also, that the end of science and of philosophy is not merely to enlighten the minds, but also ultimately to influence the conduct, of men, and not only the conduct of a few, but the conduct of the many. And to that end it should make itself understood by the many. The direct effect upon mankind will grow in strength and extent as science and philosophy are popularized in the best sense of the term, and thereby become more cosmopolitan. (Applause.)

There was a time when the investigations of science and their results were kept in the possession of privileged orders or circles, and treated as profound mysteries which could not be exposed to the gaze and the understanding of the multitude without profanation and without endangering the fixed order of society. That time lies, fortunately, far behind us. But some of us can remember the day when philosophy and science were, by many at least, studiously clothed in the darkness of formidable terminologies and obscure forms of speech, which seemed to warn off all the uninitiated. It was here and there considered unprofessional, and it exposed the man of science and the philosopher to the charge superficiality, if he discussed scientific and philosophical subjects in a language easily intelligible to the rest of mankind. I know of works of that sort professedly written in German, but requiring translation into German almost as much as if they had been written in Sanskrit. (Laughter.) And of some works written in other languages the same might be said. They tell an anecdote of a great philosopher who, on his death-bed, complained that of all his pupils only one had understood him, and that one had decidedly misunderstood him. (Laughter.) How great the misfortune was has probably never been ascertained. Perhaps the loss caused by the misunderstanding was not without compensation, as I have been told of a philosophical book of the obscure kind which was translated from one language into another, and some of the original thoughts of which were rather improved by the mistakes of the intelligent translator. (Laughter.)

We may certainly congratulate ourselves upon the fact that in our days, among men of science and philosophers, a tendency has grown up to take the generality of intelligent mankind into their confidence by speaking to them in a human language; and also a tendency vastly to enlarge the range of their immediate usefulness by applying the truths discovered by them directly and practically to all the relations and problems of actual life. (Applause.) And surely it can not be said that, by thus being made popular and cosmopolitan, science and philosophy have lost in depth and become superficial. On the contrary, it is an unquestionable fact that the same period which is marked by the popularization of science and philosophy is equally remarkable for its wonderful fertility in scientific discovery, mechanical invention, and philosophical generalization of the highest value. (Applause.) We have gained in depth and surface at the same time. (Applause.) Nor is this at all surprising. For, the greater the number of minds that are reached by new ideas, the greater will be the quantity and variety of new intellectual forces that will be inspired and stimulated into creative activity. (Applause.)

I am confident, gentlemen, I express your sentiments as well as my own when I say that, in the man who tonight honors and delights us with his presence, we greet one of the greatest representatives of that democratic tendency (applause); one of the boldest leaders of that philosophy that bursts the bonds of the closet (applause); one of the foremost builders up of science in the largest sense by establishing the relations of facts (applause); the apostle of the principle of evolution, which Darwin showed in the diversity of organic life, but which Spencer unfolded as a universal law governing all physiological, mental, and social phenomena (applause); a hero of thought (great applause), devoting his powers and his life to the vindication of the divine right of science against the intolerant authority of traditional belief (applause); an indefatigable diver into the profoundest depths of ideas and things, who has also known how to bring the discovered treasures within the reach of every intelligent mind (applause), and who has thus become one of the great teachers, not merely of a school, but of civilized humanity. (Applause.)

Among us he has come in search of rest and recreation, and I trust it will be to him a cheering satisfaction to know that, far from being a stranger with us, he has even among this youngest and busiest and most nervous of peoples, multitudes of devoted pupils and admirers, of whom the friends here present are a respectful but only a feeble representation. (Applause.)





This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1930.



* * *



This work may be in the public domain in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the rule of the shorter term to foreign works.





Facsimile of Youmans book at archive.org





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

Bob Burkhardt

Xover

Jarekt

Rocket000

Dbenbenn

Zscout370

Jacobolus

Indolences

Technion

Dha

Abigor

Reisio

Blurpeace

Dschwen

Steinsplitter

Boris23

KABALINI

Bromskloss

Tene~commonswiki

AzaToth

Bender235

PatríciaR





<EOS>The Ethics of Belief


					William Kingdon Clifford





1877





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





THE ETHICS OF BELIEF.[1]





I.—The Duty of Inquiry


A shipowner was about to send to sea an emigrant-ship. He knew that she was old, and not over-well built at the first; that she had seen many seas and climes, and often had needed repairs. Doubts had been suggested to him that possibly she was not seaworthy. These doubts preyed upon his mind, and made him unhappy; he thought that perhaps he ought to have her thoroughly overhauled and refitted, even though this should put him to great expense. Before the ship sailed, however, he succeeded in overcoming these melancholy reflections. He said to himself that she had gone safely through so many voyages and weathered so many storms that it was idle to suppose she would not come safely home from this trip also. He would put his trust in Providence, which could hardly fail to protect all these unhappy families that were leaving their fatherland to seek for better times elsewhere. He would dismiss from his mind all ungenerous suspicions about the honesty of builders and contractors. In such ways he acquired a sincere and comfortable conviction that his vessel was thoroughly safe and seaworthy; he watched her departure with a light heart, and benevolent wishes for the success of the exiles in their strange new home that was to be; and he got his insurance-money when she went down in mid-ocean and told no tales.

What shall we say of him? Surely this, that he was verily guilty of the death of those men. It is admitted that he did sincerely believe in the soundness of his ship; but the sincerity of his conviction can in no wise help him, because he had no right to believe on such evidence as was before him. He had acquired his belief not by honestly earning it in patient investigation, but by stifling his doubts. And although in the end he may have felt so sure about it that he could not think otherwise, yet inasmuch as he had knowingly and willingly worked himself into that frame of mind, he must be held responsible for it.

Let us alter the case a little, and suppose that the ship was not unsound after all; that she made her voyage safely, and many others after it. Will that diminish the guilt of her owner? Not one jot. When an action is once done, it is right or wrong for ever; no accidental failure of its good or evil fruits can possibly alter that. The man would not have been innocent, he would only have been not found out. The question of right or wrong has to do with the origin of his belief, not the matter of it; not what it was, but how he got it; not whether it turned out to be true or false, but whether he had a right to believe on such evidence as was before him.

There was once an island in which some of the inhabitants professed a religion teaching neither the doctrine of original sin nor that of eternal punishment. A suspicion got abroad that the professors of this religion had made use of unfair means to get their doctrines taught to children. They were accused of wresting the laws of their country in such a way as to remove children from the care of their natural and legal guardians; and even of stealing them away and keeping them concealed from their friends and relations. A certain number of men formed themselves into a society for the purpose of agitating the public about this matter. They published grave accusations against individual citizens of the highest position and character, and did all in their power to injure these citizens in the exercise of their professions. So great was the noise they made, that a Commission was appointed to investigate the facts; but after the Commission had carefully inquired into all the evidence that could be got, it appeared that the accused were innocent. Not only had they been accused on insufficient evidence, but the evidence of their innocence was such as the agitators might easily have obtained, if they had attempted a fair inquiry. After these disclosures the inhabitants of that country looked upon the members of the agitating society, not only as persons whose judgment was to be distrusted, but also as no longer to be counted honourable men. For although they had sincerely and conscientiously believed in the charges they had made, yet they had no right to believe on such evidence as was before them. Their sincere convictions, instead of being honestly earned by patient inquiring, were stolen by listening to the voice of prejudice and passion.

Let us vary this case also, and suppose, other things remaining as before, that a still more accurate investigation proved the accused to have been really guilty. Would this make any difference in the guilt of the accusers? Clearly not; the question is not whether their belief was true or false, but whether they entertained it on wrong grounds. They would no doubt say, 'Now you see that we were right after all; next time perhaps you will believe us.' And they might be believed, but they would not thereby become honourable men. They would not be innocent, they would only be not found out. Every one of them, if he chose to examine himself in foro conscientiæ, would know that he had acquired and nourished a belief, when he had no right to believe on such evidence as was before him; and therein he would know that he had done a wrong thing.

It may be said, however, that in both of these supposed cases it is not the belief which is judged to be wrong, but the action following upon it. The shipowner might say, 'I am perfectly certain that my ship is sound, but still I feel it my duty to have her examined, before trusting the lives of so many people to her.' And it might be said to the agitator, 'However convinced you were of the justice of your cause and the truth of your convictions, you ought not to have made a public attack upon any man's character until you had examined the evidence on both sides with the utmost patience and care.'

In the first place, let us admit that, so far as it goes, this view of the case is right and necessary; right, because even when a man's belief is so fixed that he cannot think otherwise, he still has a choice in regard to the action suggested by it, and so cannot escape the duty of investigating on the ground of the strength of his convictions; and necessary, because those who are not yet capable of controlling their feelings and thoughts must have a plain rule dealing with overt acts.

But this being premised as necessary, it becomes clear that it is not sufficient, and that our previous judgment is required to supplement it. For it is not possible so to sever the belief from the action it suggests as to condemn the one without condemning the other. No man holding a strong belief on one side of a question, or even wishing to hold a belief on one side, can investigate it with such fairness and completeness as if he were really in doubt and unbiassed; so that the existence of a belief not founded on fair inquiry unfits a man for the performance of this necessary duty.

Nor is that truly a belief at all which has not some influence upon the actions of him who holds it. He who truly believes that which prompts him to an action has looked upon the action to lust after it, he has committed it already in his heart. If a belief is not realized immediately in open deeds, it is stored up for the guidance of the future. It goes to make a part of that aggregate of beliefs which is the link between sensation and action at every moment of all our lives, and which is so organized and compacted together that no part of it can be isolated from the rest, but every new addition modifies the structure of the whole. No real belief, however trifling and fragmentary it may seem, is ever truly insignificant; it prepares us to receive more of its like, confirms those which resembled it before, and weakens others; and so gradually it lays a stealthy train in our inmost thoughts, which may some day explode into overt action, and leave its stamp upon our character for ever.

And no one man's belief is in any case a private matter which concerns himself alone. Our lives are guided by that general conception of the course of things which has been created by society for social purposes. Our words, our phrases, our forms and processes and modes of thought, are common property, fashioned and perfected from age to age; an heirloom which every succeeding generation inherits as a precious deposit and a sacred trust to be handed on to the next one, not unchanged but enlarged and purified, with some clear marks of its proper handiwork. Into this, for good or ill, is woven every belief of every man who has speech of his fellows. An awful privilege, and an awful responsibility, that we should help to create the world in which posterity will live.

In the two supposed cases which have been considered, it has been judged wrong to believe on insufficient evidence, or to nourish belief by suppressing doubts and avoiding investigation. The reason of this judgment is not far to seek: it is that in both these cases the belief held by one man was of great importance to other men. But forasmuch as no belief held by one man, however seemingly trivial the belief, and however obscure the believer, is ever actually insignificant or without its effect on the fate of mankind, we have no choice but to extend our judgment to all cases of belief whatever. Belief, that sacred faculty which prompts the decisions of our will, and knits into harmonious working all the compacted energies of our being, is ours not for ourselves, but for humanity. It is rightly used on truths which have been established by long experience and waiting toil, and which have stood in the fierce light of free and fearless questioning. Then it helps to bind men together, and to strengthen and direct their common action. It is desecrated when given to unproved and unquestioned statements, for the solace and private pleasure of the believer; to add a tinsel splendour to the plain straight road of our life and display a bright mirage beyond it; or even to drown the common sorrows of our kind by a self-deception which allows them not only to cast down, but also to degrade us. Whoso would deserve well of his fellows in this matter will guard the purity of his belief with a very fanaticism of jealous care, lest at any time it should rest on an unworthy object, and catch a stain which can never be wiped away.

It is not only the leader of men, statesman, philosopher, or poet, that owes this bounden duty to mankind. Every rustic who delivers in the village alehouse his slow, infrequent sentences, may help to kill or keep alive the fatal superstitions which clog his race. Every hard-worked wife of an artisan may transmit to her children beliefs which shall knit society together, or rend it in pieces. No simplicity of mind, no obscurity of station, can escape the universal duty of questioning all that we believe.

It is true that this duty is a hard one, and the doubt which comes out of it is often a very bitter thing. It leaves us bare and powerless where we thought that we were safe and strong. To know all about anything is to know how to deal with it under all circumstances. We feel much happier and more secure when we think we know precisely what to do, no matter what happens, than when we have lost our way and do not know where to turn. And if we have supposed ourselves to know all about anything, and to be capable of doing what is fit in regard to it, we naturally do not like to find that we are really ignorant and powerless, that we have to begin again at the beginning, and try to learn what the thing is and how it is to be dealt with—if indeed anything can be learnt about it. It is the sense of power attached to a sense of knowledge that makes men desirous of believing, and afraid of doubting.

This sense of power is the highest and best of pleasures when the belief on which it is founded is a true belief, and has been fairly earned by investigation. For then we may justly feel that it is common property, and holds good for others as well as for ourselves. Then we may be glad, not that I have learned secrets by which I am safer and stronger, but that we men have got mastery over more of the world; and we shall be strong, not for ourselves, but in the name of Man and in his strength. But if the belief has been accepted on insufficient evidence, the pleasure is a stolen one. Not only does it deceive ourselves by giving us a sense of power which we do not really possess, but it is sinful, because it is stolen in defiance of our duty to mankind. That duty is to guard ourselves from such beliefs as from a pestilence, which may shortly master our own body and then spread to the rest of the town. What would be thought of one who, for the sake of a sweet fruit, should deliberately run the risk of bringing a plague upon his family and his neighbours?

And, as in other such cases, it is not the risk only which has to be considered; for a bad action is always bad at the time when it is done, no matter what happens afterwards. Every time we let ourselves believe for unworthy reasons, we weaken our powers of self-control, of doubting, of judicially and fairly weighing evidence. We all suffer severely enough from the maintenance and support of false beliefs and the fatally wrong actions which they lead to, and the evil born when one such belief is entertained is great and wide. But a greater and wider evil arises when the credulous character is maintained and supported, when a habit of believing for unworthy reasons is fostered and made permanent. If I steal money from any person, there may be no harm done by the mere transfer of possession; he may not feel the loss, or it may prevent him from using the money badly. But I cannot help doing this great wrong towards Man, that I make myself dishonest. What hurts society is not that it should lose its property, but that it should become a den of thieves; for then it must cease to be society. This is why we ought not to do evil that good may come; for at any rate this great evil has come, that we have done evil and are made wicked thereby. In like manner, if I let myself believe anything on insufficient evidence, there may be no great harm done by the mere belief; it may be true after all, or I may never have occasion to exhibit it in outward acts. But I cannot help doing this great wrong towards Man, that I make myself credulous. The danger to society is not merely that it should believe wrong things, though that is great enough; but that it should become credulous, and lose the habit of testing things and inquiring into them; for then it must sink back into savagery.

The harm which is done by credulity in a man is not confined to the fostering of a credulous character in others, and consequent support of false beliefs. Habitual want of care about what I believe leads to habitual want of care in others about the truth of what is told to me. Men speak the truth to one another when each reveres the truth in his own mind and in the other's mind; but how shall my friend revere the truth in my mind when I myself am careless about it, when I believe things because I want to believe them, and because they are comforting and pleasant? Will he not learn to cry, 'Peace,' to me, when there is no peace? By such a course I shall surround myself with a thick atmosphere of falsehood and fraud, and in that I must live. It may matter little to me, in my cloud-castle of sweet illusions and darling lies; but it matters much to Man that I have made my neighbours ready to deceive. The credulous man is father to the liar and the cheat; he lives in the bosom of this his family, and it is no marvel if he should become even as they are. So closely are our duties knit together, that whoso shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.

To sum up: it is wrong always, everywhere, and for anyone, to believe anything upon insufficient evidence.

If a man, holding a belief which he was taught in childhood or persuaded of afterwards, keeps down and pushes away any doubts which arise about it in his mind, purposely avoids the reading of books and the company of men that call in question or discuss it, and regards as impious those questions which cannot easily be asked without disturbing it—the life of that man is one long sin against mankind.

If this judgment seems harsh when applied to those simple souls who have never known better, who have been brought up from the cradle with a horror of doubt, and taught that their eternal welfare depends on what they believe, then it leads to the very serious question, Who hath made Israel to sin?

It may be permitted me to fortify this judgment with the sentence of Milton[2]—

'A man may be a heretic in the truth; and if he believe things only because his pastor says so, or the assembly so determine, without knowing other reason, though his belief be true, yet the very truth he holds becomes his heresy.'

And with this famous aphorism of Coleridge[3]—

'He who begins by loving Christianity better than Truth, will proceed by loving his own sect or Church better than Christianity, and end in loving himself better than all.'

Inquiry into the evidence of a doctrine is not to be made once for all, and then taken as finally settled. It is never lawful to stifle a doubt; for either it can be honestly answered by means of the inquiry already made, or else it proves that the inquiry was not complete.

'But,' says one, 'I am a busy man; I have no time for the long course of study which would be necessary to make me in any degree a competent judge of certain questions, or even able to understand the nature of the arguments.' Then he should have no time to believe.





II.—The Weight of Authority.


Are we then to become universal sceptics, doubting everything, afraid always to put one foot before the other until we have personally tested the firmness of the road? Are we to deprive ourselves of the help and guidance of that vast body of knowledge which is daily growing upon the world, because neither we nor any other one person can possibly test a hundredth part of it by immediate experiment or observation, and because it would not be completely proved if we did? Shall we steal and tell lies because we have had no personal experience wide enough to justify the belief that it is wrong to do so?

There is no practical danger that such consequences will ever follow from scrupulous care and self-control in the matter of belief. Those men who have most nearly done their duty in this respect have found that certain great principles, and these most fitted for the guidance of life, have stood out more and more clearly in proportion to the care and honesty with which they were tested, and have acquired in this way a practical certainty. The beliefs about right and wrong which guide our actions in dealing with men in society, and the beliefs about physical nature which guide our actions in dealing with animate and inanimate bodies, these never suffer from investigation; they can take care of themselves, without being propped up by 'acts of faith,' the clamour of paid advocates, or the suppression of contrary evidence. Moreover there are many cases in which it is our duty to act upon probabilities, although the evidence is not such as to justify present belief; because it is precisely by such action, and by observation of its fruits, that evidence is got which may justify future belief. So that we have no reason to fear lest a habit of conscientious inquiry should paralyse the actions of our daily life.

But because it is not enough to say, 'It is wrong to believe on unworthy evidence,' without saying also what evidence is worthy, we shall now go on to inquire under what circumstances it is lawful to believe on the testimony of others; and then, further, we shall inquire more generally when and why we may believe that which goes beyond our own experience, or even beyond the experience of mankind.

In what cases, then, let us ask in the first place, is the testimony of a man unworthy of belief? He may say that which is untrue either knowingly or unknowingly. In the first case he is lying, and his moral character is to blame; in the second case he is ignorant or mistaken, and it is only his knowledge or his judgment which is in fault. In order that we may have the right to accept his testimony as ground for believing what he says, we must have reasonable grounds for trusting his veracity, that he is really trying to speak the truth so far as he knows it; his knowledge, that he has had opportunities of knowing the truth about this matter; and his judgment, that he has made proper use of those opportunities in coming to the conclusion which he affirms.

However plain and obvious these reasons may be, so that no man of ordinary intelligence, reflecting upon the matter, could fail to arrive at them, it is nevertheless true that a great many persons do habitually disregard them in weighing testimony. Of the two questions, equally important to the trustworthiness of a witness, 'Is he dishonest?' and 'May he be mistaken?' the majority of mankind are perfectly satisfied if one can, with some show of probability, be answered in the negative. The excellent moral character of a man is alleged as ground for accepting his statements about things which he cannot possibly have known. A Mohammedan, for example, will tell us that the character of his Prophet was so noble and majestic that it commands the reverence even of those who do not believe in his mission. So admirable was his moral teaching, so wisely put together the great social machine which he created, that his precepts have not only been accepted by a great portion of mankind, but have actually been obeyed. His institutions have on the one hand rescued the negro from savagery, and on the other hand have taught civilization to the advancing West; and although the races which held the highest forms of his faith, and most fully embodied his mind and thought, have all been conquered and swept away by barbaric tribes, yet the history of their marvellous attainments remains as an imperishable glory to Islam. Are we to doubt the word of a man so great and so good? Can we suppose that this magnificent genius, this splendid moral hero, has lied to us about the most solemn and sacred matters? The testimony of Mohammed is clear, that there is but one God, and that he, Mohammed, is his prophet; that if we believe in him we shall enjoy everlasting felicity, but that if we do not we shall be damned. This testimony rests on the most awful of foundations, the revelation of heaven itself; for was he not visited by the angel Gabriel, as he fasted and prayed in his desert cave, and allowed to enter into the blessed fields of Paradise? Surely God is God and Mohammed is the Prophet of God.

What should we answer to this Mussulman? First, no doubt, we should be tempted to take exception against his view of the character of the Prophet and the uniformly beneficial influence of Islam: before we could go with him altogether in these matters it might seem that we should have to forget many terrible things of which we have heard or read. But if we chose to grant him all these assumptions, for the sake of argument, and because it is difficult both for the faithful and for infidels to discuss them fairly and without passion, still we should have something to say which takes away the ground of his belief, and therefore shows that it is wrong to entertain it. Namely this: the character of Mohammed is excellent evidence that he was honest and spoke the truth so far as he knew it; but it is no evidence at all that he knew what the truth was. What means could he have of knowing that the form which appeared to him to be the angel Gabriel was not a hallucination, and that his apparent visit to Paradise was not a dream? Grant that he himself was fully persuaded and honestly believed that he had the guidance of heaven, and was the vehicle of a supernatural revelation, how could he know that this strong conviction was not a mistake? Let us put ourselves in his place; we shall find that the more completely we endeavour to realize what passed through his mind, the more clearly we shall perceive that the Prophet could have had no adequate ground for the belief in his own inspiration. It is most probable that he himself never doubted of the matter, or thought of asking the question; but we are in the position of those to whom the question has been asked, and who are bound to answer it. It is known to medical observers that solitude and want of food are powerful means of producing delusion and of fostering a tendency to mental disease. Let us suppose, then, that I, like Mohammed, go into desert places to fast and pray; what things can happen to me which will give me the right to believe that I am divinely inspired? Suppose that I get information, apparently from a celestial visitor, which upon being tested is found to be correct. I cannot be sure, in the first place, that the celestial visitor is not a figment of my own mind, and that the information did not come to me, unknown at the time to my consciousness, through some subtle channel of sense. But if my visitor were a real visitor, and for a long time gave me information which was found to be trustworthy, this would indeed be good ground for trusting him in the future as to such matters as fall within human powers of verification; but it would not be ground for trusting his testimony as to any other matters. For although his tested character would justify me in believing that he spoke the truth so far as he knew, yet the same question would present itself—what ground is there for supposing that he knows?

Even if my supposed visitor had given me such information, subsequently verified by me, as proved him to have means of knowledge about verifiable matters far exceeding my own; this would not justify me in believing what he said about matters that are not at present capable of verification by man. It would be ground for interesting conjecture, and for the hope that, as the fruit of our patient inquiry, we might by-and-by attain to such a means of verification as should rightly turn conjecture into belief. For belief belongs to man, and to the guidance of human affairs: no belief is real unless it guide our actions, and those very actions supply a test of its truth.

But, it may be replied, the acceptance of Islam as a system is just that action which is prompted by belief in the mission of the Prophet, and which will serve for a test of its truth. Is it possible to believe that a system which has succeeded so well is really founded upon a delusion? Not only have individual saints found joy and peace in believing, and verified those spiritual experiences which are promised to the faithful, but nations also have been raised from savagery or barbarism to a higher social state. Surely we are at liberty to say that the belief has been acted upon, and that it has been verified.

It requires, however, but little consideration to show that what has really been verified is not at all the supernal character of the Prophet's mission, or the trustworthiness of his authority in matters which we ourselves cannot test, but only his practical wisdom in certain very mundane things. The fact that believers have found joy and peace in believing gives us the right to say that the doctrine is a comfortable doctrine, and pleasant to the soul; but it does not give us the right to say that it is true. And the question which our conscience is always asking about that which we are tempted to believe is not, 'Is it comfortable and pleasant?' but, 'Is it true?' That the Prophet preached certain doctrines, and predicted that spiritual comfort would be found in them, proves only his sympathy with human nature and his knowledge of it; but it does not prove his superhuman knowledge of theology.

And if we admit for the sake of argument (for it seems that we cannot do more) that the progress made by Moslem nations in certain cases was really due to the system formed and sent forth into the world by Mohammed, we are not at liberty to conclude from this that he was inspired to declare the truth about things which we cannot verify. We are only at liberty to infer the excellence of his moral precepts, or of the means which he devised for so working upon men as so get them obeyed, or of the social and political machinery which he set up. And it would require a great amount of careful examination into the history of those nations to determine which of these things had the greater share in the result. So that here again it is the Prophet's knowledge of human nature, and his sympathy with it, that are verified; not his divine inspiration, or his knowledge of theology.

If there were only one Prophet, indeed, it might well seem a difficult and even an ungracious task to decide upon what points we would trust him, and on what we would doubt his authority; seeing what help and furtherance all men have gained in all ages from those who saw more clearly, who felt more strongly, and who sought the truth with more single heart than their weaker brethren. But there is not only one Prophet; and while the consent of many upon that which, as men, they had real means of knowing and did know, has endured to the end, and been honourably built into the great fabric of human knowledge, the diverse witness of some about that which they did not and could not know remains as a warning to us that to exaggerate the prophetic authority is to misuse it, and to dishonour those who have sought only to help and further us after their power. It is hardly in human nature that a man should quite accurately gauge the limits of his own insight; but it is the duty of those who profit by his work to consider carefully where he may have been carried beyond it. If we must needs embalm his possible errors along with his solid achievements, and use his authority as an excuse for believing what he cannot have known, we make of his goodness an occasion to sin.

To consider only one other such witness: the followers of the Buddha have at least as much right to appeal to individual and social experience in support of the authority of the Eastern saviour. The special mark of his religion, it is said, that in which it has never been surpassed, is the comfort and consolation which it gives to the sick and sorrowful, the tender sympathy with which it soothes and assuages all the natural griefs of men. And surely no triumph of social morality can be greater or nobler than that which has kept nearly half the human race from persecuting in the name of religion. If we are to trust the accounts of his early followers, he believed himself to have come upon earth with a divine and cosmic mission to set rolling the wheel of the law. Being a prince, he divested himself of his kingdom, and of his free will became acquainted with misery, that he might learn how to meet and subdue it. Could such a man speak falsely about solemn things? And as for his knowledge, was he not a man miraculous with powers more than man's? He was born of woman without the help of man; he rose into the air and was transfigured before his kinsmen; at last he went up bodily into heaven from the top of Adam's Peak. Is not his word to be believed in when he testifies of heavenly things?

If there were only he, and no other, with such claims! But there is Mohammed with his testimony; we cannot choose but listen to them both. The Prophet tells us that there is one God, and that we shall live for ever in joy or misery, according as we believe in the Prophet or not. The Buddha says that there is no God, and that we shall be annihilated by-and-by if we are good enough. Both cannot be infallibly inspired; one or the other must have been the victim of a delusion, and thought he knew that which he really did not know. Who shall dare to say which? and how can we justify ourselves in believing that the other was not also deluded?

We are led, then, to these judgments following. The goodness and greatness of a man do not justify us in accepting a belief upon the warrant of his authority, unless there are reasonable grounds for supposing that he knew the truth of what he was saying. And there can be no grounds for supposing that a man knows that which we, without ceasing to be men, could not be supposed to verify.

If a chemist tells me, who am no chemist, that a certain substance can be made by putting together other substances in certain proportions and subjecting them to a known process, I am quite justified in believing this upon his authority, unless I know anything against his character or his judgment. For his professional training is one which tends to encourage veracity and the honest pursuit of truth, and to produce a dislike of hasty conclusions and slovenly investigation. And I have reasonable ground for supposing that he knows the truth of what he is saying, for although I am no chemist, I can be made to understand so much of the methods and processes of the science as makes it conceivable to me that, without ceasing to be man, I might verify the statement. I may never actually verify it, or even see any experiment which goes towards verifying it; but still I have quite reason enough to justify me in believing that the verification is within the reach of human appliances and powers, and in particular that it has been actually performed by my informant. His result, the belief to which he has been led by his inquiries, is valid not only for himself but for others; it is watched and tested by those who are working in the same ground, and who know that no greater service can be rendered to science than the purification of accepted results from the errors which may have crept into them. It is in this way that the result becomes common property, a right object of belief, which is a social affair and matter of public business. Thus it is to be observed that his authority is valid because there are those who question it and verify it; that it is precisely this process of examining and purifying that keeps alive among investigators the love of that which shall stand all possible tests, the sense of public responsibility as of those whose work, if well done, shall remain as the enduring heritage of mankind.

But if my chemist tells me that an atom of oxygen has existed unaltered in weight and rate of vibration throughout all time, I have no right to believe this on his authority, for it is a thing which he cannot know without ceasing to be man. He may quite honestly believe that this statement is a fair inference from his experiments, but in that case his judgment is at fault. A very simple consideration of the character of experiments would show him that they never can lead to results of such a kind; that being themselves only approximate and limited, they cannot give us knowledge which is exact and universal. No eminence of character and genius can give a man authority enough to justify us in believing him when he makes statements implying exact or universal knowledge.

Again, an Arctic explorer may tell us that in a given latitude and longitude he has experienced such and such a degree of cold, that the sea was of such a depth, and the ice of such a character. We should be quite right to believe him, in the absence of any stain upon his veracity. It is conceivable that we might, without ceasing to be men, go there and verify his statement; it can be tested by the witness of his companions, and there is adequate ground for supposing that he knows the truth of what he is saying. But if an old whaler tells us that the ice is three hundred feet thick all the way up to the Pole, we shall not be justified in believing him. For although the statement may be capable of verification by man, it is certainly not capable of verification by him, with any means and appliances which he has possessed; and he must have persuaded himself of the truth of it by some means which does not attach any credit to his testimony. Even if, therefore, the matter affirmed is within the reach of human knowledge, we have no right to accept it upon authority unless it is within the reach of our informant's knowledge.

What shall we say of that authority, more venerable and august than any individual witness, the time-honoured tradition of the human race? An atmosphere of beliefs and conceptions has been formed by the labours and struggles of our forefathers, which enables us to breathe amid the various and complex circumstances of our life. It is around and about us and within us; we cannot think except in the forms and processes of thought which it supplies. Is it possible to doubt and to test it? and if possible, is it right?

We shall find reason to answer that it is not only possible and right, but our bounden duty; that the main purpose of the tradition itself is to supply us with the means of asking questions, of testing and inquiring into things; that if we misuse it, and take it as a collection of cut-and-dried statements, to be accepted without further inquiry, we are not only injuring ourselves here, but by refusing to do our part towards the building up of the fabric which shall be inherited by our children, we are tending to cut off ourselves and our race from the human line.

Let us first take care to distinguish a kind of tradition which especially requires to be examined and called in question, because it especially shrinks from inquiry. Suppose that a medicine-man in Central Africa tells his tribe that a certain powerful medicine in his tent will be propitiated if they kill their cattle; and that the tribe believe him. Whether the medicine was propitiated or not, there are no means of verifying, but the cattle are gone. Still the belief may be kept up in the tribe that propitiation has been effected in this way; and in a later generation it will be all the easier for another medicine-man to persuade them to a similar act. Here the only reason for belief is that everybody has believed the thing for so long that it must be true. And yet the belief was founded on fraud, and has been propagated by credulity. That man will undoubtedly do right, and be a friend of men, who shall call it in question and see that there is no evidence for it, help his neighbours to see as he does, and even, if need be, go into the holy tent and break the medicine.

The rule which should guide us in such cases is simple and obvious enough: that the aggregate testimony of our neighbours is subject to the same conditions as the testimony of any one of them. Namely, we have no right to believe a thing true because everybody says so, unless there are good grounds for believing that some one person at least has the means of knowing what is true, and is speaking the truth so far as he knows it. However many nations and generations of men are brought into the witness-box, they cannot testify to anything which they do not know. Every man who has accepted the statement from somebody else, without himself testing and verifying it, is out of court; his word is worth nothing at all. And when we get back at last to the true birth and beginning of the statement, two serious questions must be disposed of in regard to him who first made it: was he mistaken in thinking that he knew about this matter, or was he lying?

This last question is unfortunately a very actual and practical one even to us at this day and in this country. We have no occasion to go to La Salette, or to Central Africa, or to Lourdes, for examples of immoral and debasing superstition. It is only too possible for a child to grow up in London surrounded by an atmosphere of beliefs fit only for the savage, which have in our own time been founded in fraud and propagated by credulity.

Laying aside, then, such tradition as is handed on without testing by successive generations, let us consider that which is truly built up out of the common experience of mankind. This great fabric is for the guidance of our thoughts, and through them of our actions, both in the moral and in the material world. In the moral world, for example, it gives us the conceptions of right in general, of justice, of truth, of beneficence, and the like. These are given as conceptions, not as statements or propositions; they answer to certain definite instincts, which are certainly within us, however they came there. That it is right to be beneficent is matter of immediate personal experience; for when a man retires within himself and there finds something, wider and more lasting than his solitary personality, which says, 'I want to do right,' as well as, 'I want to do good to man,' he can verify by direct observation that one instinct is founded upon and agrees fully with the other. And it is his duty so to verify this and all similar statements.

The tradition says also, at a definite place and time, that such and such actions are just, or true, or beneficent. For all such rules a further inquiry is necessary, since they are sometimes established by an authority other than that of the moral sense founded on experience. Until recently, the moral tradition of our own country—and indeed of all Europe—taught that it was beneficent to give money indiscriminately to beggars. But the questioning of this rule, and investigation into it, led men to see that true beneficence is that which helps a man to do the work which he is most fitted for, not that which keeps and encourages him in idleness; and that to neglect this distinction in the present is to prepare pauperism and misery for the future. By this testing and discussion, not only has practice been purified and made more beneficent, but the very conception of beneficence has been made wider and wiser. Now here the great social heirloom consists of two parts: the instinct of beneficence, which makes a certain side of our nature, when predominant, wish to do good to men; and the intellectual conception of beneficence, which we can compare with any proposed course of conduct and ask, 'Is this beneficent or not?' By the continual asking and answering of such questions the conception grows in breadth and distinctness, and the instinct becomes strengthened and purified. It appears then that the great use of the conception, the intellectual part of the heirloom, is to enable us to ask questions; that it grows and is kept straight by means of these questions; and if we do not use it for that purpose we shall gradually lose it altogether, and be left with a mere code of regulations which cannot rightly be called morality at all.

Such considerations apply even more obviously and clearly, if possible, to the store of beliefs and conceptions which our fathers have amassed for us in respect of the material world. We are ready to laugh at the rule of thumb of the Australian, who continues to tie his hatchet to the side of the handle, although the Birmingham fitter has made a hole on purpose for him to put the handle in. His people have tied up hatchets so for ages: who is he that he should set himself up against their wisdom? He has sunk so low that he cannot do what some of them must have done in the far distant past—call in question an established usage, and invent or learn something better. Yet here, in the dim beginning of knowledge, where science and art are one, we find only the same simple rule which applies to the highest and deepest growths of that cosmic Tree; to its loftiest flower-tipped branches as well as to the profoundest of its hidden roots; the rule, namely, that what is stored up and handed down to us is rightly used by those who act as the makers acted, when they stored it up; those who use it to ask further questions, to examine, to investigate; who try honestly and solemnly to find out what is the right way of looking at things and of dealing with them.

A question rightly asked is already half answered, said Jacobi; we may add that the method of solution is the other half of the answer, and that the actual result counts for nothing by the side of these two. For an example let us go to the telegraph, where theory and practice, grown each to years of discretion, are marvellously wedded for the fruitful service of men. Ohm found that the strength of an electric current is directly proportional to the strength of the battery which produces it, and inversely as the length of the wire along which it has to travel. This is called Ohm's law; but the result, regarded as a statement to be believed, is not the valuable part of it. The first half is the question: what relation holds good between these quantities? So put, the question involves already the conception of strength of current, and of strength of battery, as quantities to be measured and compared; it hints clearly that these are the things to be attended to in the study of electric currents. The second half is the method of investigation; how to measure these quantities, what instruments are required for the experiment, and how are they to be used? The student who begins to learn about electricity is not asked to believe in Ohm's law: he is made to understand the question, he is placed before the apparatus, and he is taught to verify it. He learns to do things, not to think he knows things; to use instruments and to ask questions, not to accept a traditional statement. The question which required a genius to ask it rightly is answered by a tyro. If Ohm's law were suddenly lost and forgotten by all men, while the question and the method of solution remained, the result could be rediscovered in an hour. But the result by itself, if known to a people who could not comprehend the value of the question or the means of solving it, would be like a watch in the hands of a savage who could not wind it up, or an iron steamship worked by Spanish engineers.

In regard, then, to the sacred tradition of humanity, we learn that it consists, not in propositions or statements which are to be accepted and believed on the authority of the tradition, but in questions rightly asked, in conceptions which enable us to ask further questions, and in methods of answering questions. The value of all these things depends on their being tested day by day. The very sacredness of the precious deposit imposes upon us the duty and the responsibility of testing it, of purifying and enlarging it to the utmost of our power. He who makes use of its results to stifle his own doubts, or to hamper the inquiry of others, is guilty of a sacrilege which centuries shall never be able to blot out. When the labours and questionings of honest and brave men shall have built up the fabric of known truth to a glory which we in this generation can neither hope for nor imagine, in that pure and holy temple he shall have no part nor lot, but his name and his works shall be cast out into the darkness of oblivion for ever.





III.—The Limits of Inference.


The question in what cases we may believe that which goes beyond our experience, is a very large and delicate one, extending to the whole range of scientific method, and requiring a considerable increase in the application of it before it can be answered with anything approaching to completeness. But one rule, lying on the threshold of the subject, of extreme simplicity and vast practical importance, may here be touched upon and shortly laid down.

A little reflection will show us that every belief, even the simplest and most fundamental, goes beyond experience when regarded as a guide to our actions. A burnt child dreads the fire, because it believes that the fire will burn it to-day just as it did yesterday; but this belief goes beyond experience, and assumes that the unknown fire of to-day is like the known fire of yesterday. Even the belief that the child was burnt yesterday goes beyond present experience, which contains only the memory of a burning, and not the burning itself; it assumes, therefore, that this memory is trustworthy, although we know that a memory may often be mistaken. But if it is to be used as a guide to action, as a hint of what the future is to be, it must assume something about that future, namely, that it will be consistent with the supposition that the burning really took place yesterday; which is going beyond experience. Even the fundamental 'I am,' which cannot be doubted, is no guide to action until it takes to itself 'I shall be,' which goes beyond experience. The question is not, therefore, 'May we believe what goes beyond experience?' for this is involved in the very nature of belief; but 'How far and in what manner may we add to our experience in forming our beliefs?'

And an answer, of utter simplicity and universality, is suggested by the example we have taken: a burnt child dreads the fire. We may go beyond experience by assuming that what we do not know is like what we do know; or, in other words, we may add to our experience on the assumption of a uniformity in nature. What this uniformity precisely is, how we grow in the knowledge of it from generation to generation, these are questions which for the present we lay aside, being content to examine two instances which may serve to make plainer the nature of the rule.

From certain observations made with the spectroscope, we infer the existence of hydrogen in the sun. By looking into the spectroscope when the sun is shining on its slit, we see certain definite bright lines: and experiments made upon bodies on the earth have taught us that when these bright lines are seen hydrogen is the source of them. We assume, then, that the unknown bright lines in the sun are like the known bright lines of the laboratory, and that hydrogen in the sun behaves as hydrogen under similar circumstances would behave on the earth.

But are we not trusting our spectroscope too much? Surely, having found it to be trustworthy for terrestrial substances, where its statements can be verified by man, we are justified in accepting its testimony in other like cases; but not when it gives us information about things in the sun, where its testimony cannot be directly verified by man?

Certainly, we want to know a little more before this inference can be justified; and fortunately we do know this. The spectroscope testifies to exactly the same thing in the two cases; namely, that light-vibrations of a certain rate are being sent through it. Its construction is such that if it were wrong about this in one case, it would be wrong in the other. When we come to look into the matter, we find that we have really assumed the matter of the sun to be like the matter of the earth, made up of a certain number of distinct substances; and that each of these, when very hot, has a distinct rate of vibration, by which it may be recognized and singled out from the rest. But this is the kind of assumption which we are justified in using when we add to our experience. It is an assumption of uniformity in nature, and can only be checked by comparison with many similar assumptions which we have to make in other such cases.

But is this a true belief, of the existence of hydrogen in the sun? Can it help in the right guidance of human action?

Certainly not, if it is accepted on unworthy grounds, and without some understanding of the process by which it is got at. But when this process is taken in as the ground of the belief, it becomes a very serious and practical matter. For if there is no hydrogen in the sun, the spectroscope—that is to say, the measurement of rates of vibration—must be an uncertain guide in recognizing different substances; and consequently it ought not to be used in chemical analysis—in assaying, for example—to the great saving of time, trouble, and money. Whereas the acceptance of the spectroscopic method as trustworthy has enriched us not only with new metals, which is a great thing, but with new processes of investigation, which is vastly greater.

For another example, let us consider the way in which we infer the truth of an historical event—say the siege of Syracuse in the Peloponnesian war. Our experience is that manuscripts exist which are said to be and which call themselves manuscripts of the history of Thucydides; that in other manuscripts, stated to be by later historians, he is described as living during the time of the war; and that books, supposed to date from the revival of learning, tell us how these manuscripts had been preserved and were then acquired. We find also that men do not, as a rule, forge books and histories without a special motive; we assume that in this respect men in the past were like men in the present; and we observe that in this case no special motive was present. That is, we add to our experience on the assumption of a uniformity in the characters of men. Because our knowledge of this uniformity is far less complete and exact than our knowledge of that which obtains in physics, inferences of the historical kind are more precarious and less exact than inferences in many other sciences.

But if there is any special reason to suspect the character of the persons who wrote or transmitted certain books, the case becomes altered. If a group of documents give internal evidence that they were produced among people who forged books in the names of others, and who, in describing events, suppressed those things which did not suit them, while they amplified such as did suit them; who not only committed these crimes, but gloried in them as proofs of humility and zeal; then we must say that upon such documents no true historical inference can be founded, but only unsatisfactory conjecture.

We may, then, add to our experience on the assumption of a uniformity in nature; we may fill in our picture of what is and has been, as experience gives it us, in such a way as to make the whole consistent with this uniformity. And practically demonstrative inference—that which gives us a right to believe in the result of it—is a clear showing that in no other way than by the truth of this result can the uniformity of nature be saved.

No evidence, therefore, can justify us in believing the truth of a statement which is contrary to, or outside of, the uniformity of nature. If our experience is such that it cannot be filled up consistently with uniformity, all we have a right to conclude is that there is something wrong somewhere; but the possibility of inference is taken away; we must rest in our experience, and not go beyond it at all. If an event really happened which was not a part of the uniformity of nature, it would have two properties: no evidence could give the right to believe it to any except those whose actual experience it was; and no inference worthy of belief could be founded upon it at all.

Are we then bound to believe that nature is absolutely and universally uniform? Certainly not; we have no right to believe anything of this kind. The rule only tells us that in forming beliefs which go beyond our experience, we may make the assumption that nature is practically uniform so far as we are concerned. Within the range of human action and verification, we may form, by help of this assumption, actual beliefs; beyond it, only those hypotheses which serve for the more accurate asking of questions.

To sum up:—

We may believe what goes beyond our experience, only when it is inferred from that experience by the assumption that what we do not know is like what we know.

We may believe the statement of another person, when there is reasonable ground for supposing that he knows the matter of which he speaks, and that he is speaking the truth so far as he knows it.

It is wrong in all cases to believe on insufficient evidence; and where it is presumption to doubt and to investigate, there it is worse than presumption to believe.

References



↑ Contemporary Review, January, 1877.

↑ Areopagitica.

↑ Aids to Reflection.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

Peter1c

Zaneselvans

TE(æ)A,ea.

Tom Morris

ResidentScholar

George Orwell III

Kisama





<EOS>The Harvard Classics Vol. 51 — Natural Science: General Introduction


					Lawrence Joseph Henderson





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





NATURAL SCIENCE

I. GENERAL INTRODUCTION

By Professor Lawrence J. Henderson



NATURAL science is the latest of man's great achievements. The other important agents of civilization long ago attained their full stature, and many of the finest products of human endeavor, like literature and the fine arts, have been through many centuries the common possession of the race. Even music, the most modern of the arts, is no longer young. But only in the last half century has science reached maturity and revealed its titanic power for good and evil in the reconstruction of the surroundings of our life. Yet to-day, after a few brief decades of the scientific era, agriculture, transportation and communication, food, clothing and shelter, birth and death themselves—in truth almost all of man's experiences and activities—are different from what they were before, and the earth which he inhabits is transformed so that it is with difficulty that he can imagine the conditions of life in past centuries.

Meantime, these very changes which science has wrought have combined with the great generalizations of science to modify philosophy and to direct the current of religious thought. Here again the effects are sometimes good, sometimes evil, but they are always profound and widely influential. Most wonderful of all is the growth of natural knowledge itself, the basis of these changes. Ever more extensive and complete is the description of nature; all things are counted, measured, and figured, then analyzed and classified. Out of such orderly knowledge generalizations and laws arise, and with the help of experiment and mathematical analysis receive their confirmation, until at length positive knowledge appears to extend to almost all phenomena, and, except the origin of things, little seems quite obscure or wholly unknown, while much is very securely established.

The history of science and of its influence on civilization is in some respects the simplest of the departments of history, for it is less complicated by those incalculable forces which, springing from man's passions and personal interests, make up much of the charm and difficulty of general history. Deprived of these psychological elements, the history of science is in fact more nearly a part of the natural history of man; it is concerned with the latest stage of his struggle with the environment, with his cunning and deliberate devices to master it, and with the marvelous structure of theoretical knowledge which he has built up in the process.





ANTHROPOLOGY



Our lives are mainly occupied with the material world, with production and distribution of food and clothing, and the construction of dwellings which shall adequately protect us from the cold, the wind, and the rain. All higher human activities rest upon the successful establishment of these as a foundation. Hence progress, as the word is commonly understood, is most often a step in the control of the environment to the end of better production, construction, and distribution of some commodity. Such progress is not perhaps what the heart of man most ardently desires, but it is, at all events, the one kind about which there can be no doubt.

Many of the most wonderful advances in mastery of the environment are prehistoric, the results of good fortune and gradually widening experience utilized by primitive men of native intelligence. Thus clay is used as the filling for a basket, its baking is accidentally observed, and pottery results; again a log, through a long series of gradual changes and small inventions, becomes transformed into a good boat or canoe.

Sophocles, in a famous chorus of the "Antigone," has celebrated such achievements:

Strophe I.

Many the forms of life,

Wondrous and strange to see,



But nought than man appears

More wondrous and more strange.

He, with the wintry gales,

O'er the white foaming sea,

Mid wild waves surging round,

Windeth his way across:

Earth of all Gods, from ancient days, the first,

Unworn and undecayed,

He, with his ploughs that travel o'er and o'er,

Furrowing with horse and mule,

Wears ever year by year.



Antistrophe I.

The thoughtless tribe of birds,

The beasts that roam the fields,

The brood in sea-depths born,

He takes them all in nets

Knotted in snaring mesh,

Man wonderful in skill,

And by his subtle arts

He holds in sway the beasts

That roam the fields, or tread the mountain's height;

And brings the binding yoke

Upon the neck of horse with shaggy mane,

Or bull on mountain crest,

Untameable in strength.



Strophe II.

And speech, and thought as swift as wind,

And tempered mood for higher life of states,

These he has learnt, and how to flee

Or the clear cold of frost unkind,

Or darts of storm and shower,

Man all-providing.[1]





Many will always regard this as the final expression of man's wonder and admiration at that which man has done in winning his civilization. But while we admire and marvel at the feats of primitive man, we must not forget to distinguish a very important difference between such and many achievements of civilized man—in fact, between prehistoric works and deeds and all the greatest scientific achievements. Very wonderful as the early progress was,—think of civilized man's failure to domesticate animals, and, incomparably important, think of the winning of fire,—it lacked a certain germ of growth, which is familiar to us in our own times. Each thing came by itself, it came by accident, and it did not directly lead to other things. Beyond living one's life and waiting for something to turn up so that one's ingenuity might be exercised, there was no method of discovery or invention; the knowledge that existed was not systematized; there was no generalization from experience; and each invention, aside from its particular utility, led to nothing else. How different have been the effects of Pasteur's discovery of the place of micro-organisms in nature![2] Almost at once the causes of many of the gravest diseases of man and other animals became known. There followed the discovery of means of avoiding disease, of curing disease, and we are now well on the way to blot out some of the oldest scourges of humanity. Such are a few of the results in medicine. When the chemical and agricultural results are added, Pasteur appears already to have influenced the life of almost every civilized man.

Clearly the early advances of practical knowledge are not to be confounded with natural science. They belong to the period of human development which is the concern of the anthropologist, and they only concern us as they help to an understanding of what science really is.





ANCIENT SCIENCE



A very little true science did, however, exist at the dawn of history, such as a description of the zodiac and astronomical knowledge, upon which more or less perfect calendars could be based, and knowledge of the properties of triangles which was useful in surveying after the Nile floods. To this slender store the earliest of the Greek philosophers contributed new discoveries, but before long the genius and power of the Greek mind led to overweening confidence in speculation unaided by observation and experiment, and, as a result, the great period of Athens is not scientifically of the highest importance. Aristotle, to be sure, and his pupil Theophrastus, contributed very greatly to sound knowledge of animals, plants, and rocks, but in the theoretical sciences vague ideas based upon words rather than phenomena or clear and precise concepts led them astray.

"The most conspicious example," says Bacon, "of the first class [i. e., of the Rational School of Philosophers] was Aristotle, who corrupted natural philosophy by his logic: fashioning the world out of categories; assigning to the human soul, the noblest of substances, a genus from words of the second intention; doing the business of density and rarity (which is to make bodies of greater or less dimensions—that is, occupy greater or less spaces), by the frigid distinction of act and power; asserting that single bodies have each a single and proper motion, and that if they participate in any other, then this results from an external cause; and imposing countless other arbitrary restrictions on the nature of things; being always more solicitous to provide an answer to the question and affirm something positive in words than about the inner truth of things; a failing best shown when his philosophy is compared with other systems of note among the Greeks. For the Homœomera of Anaxagoras; the Atoms of Leucippus and Democritus; the Heaven and Earth of Parmenides; the Strife and Friendship of Empedocles; Heraclius's doctrine how bodies are resolved into the indifferent nature of fire, and remolded into solids; have all of them some taste of the natural philosopher—some savor of the nature of things, and experience, and bodies; whereas, in the physics of Aristotle you hear hardly anything but the words of logic; which in his metaphysics also, under a more imposing name, and more, forsooth, as a realist than a nominalist, he has handled over again. Nor let any weight be given to the fact that in his books on animals and his problems, and other of his treatises, there is frequent dealing with experiments. For he had come to his conclusion before; he did not consult experience, as he should have done, in order to do the framing of his decisions and axioms; but, having first determined the question according to his will, he then resorts to experience, and, bending her into conformity with his placets, leads her about like a captive in a procession; so that even on this count he is more guilty than his modern followers, the schoolmen, who have abandoned experience altogether."[3]

Later, when Alexandria became the center of the Greek world, and the limitations of metaphysics had become somewhat more evident, there was a return to positive science. For nearly a thousand years men, notably Aristarchus, Eratosthenes, Hipparchus, Euclid, Hero, and Ptolemy, labored at Alexandria, employing the true methods of science and collecting valuable stores of information in astronomy, geometry, trigonometry, optics, heat, and even anatomy. The greatest of the scientific work of antiquity was done during the Alexandrine period by Archimedes at Syracuse. It consists in the creation of the science of statics.

The Romans, practical men—according to Disraeli's definition, those who practice the errors of their forefathers—did little to advance the sciences, and, when the dark ages extinguished all intellectual endeavor, it was little enough that men had achieved in science, compared with their other deeds.

Yet it is certain that both true science and the true methods of science had been established in antiquity. It was not so much the errors of the ancient world as the errors of the Middle Ages in interpretation of the ancient world, and the undue importance that was assigned to Aristotle, which held back science during the first centuries of the Renaissance.

On the other hand, it cannot be denied that if the science of antiquity at its best, in the mechanics of Archimedes, the descriptive astronomy of Hipparchus, the geometry of Euclid, and the zoology of Aristotle, did manifest most of the characteristics of method and treatment which we know to-day, nearly all of the results of modern science, the modifications of life and civilization, are lacking in antiquity. Ancient science was in great part sterile; modern science is now the principal agent in social evolution.





RISE OF MODERN SCIENCE



It was not until the seventeenth century that modern science gained a secure footing. Just as in antiquity, the minds of men once more ranged over the whole field of the intellectual and the imaginative, and produced many works of commanding genius in many different subjects before again buckling down to the more sober tasks of science, which they were doomed to labor upon till now, and quite possibly forever.

Leonardo da Vinci, most versatile of all men, had, to be sure, successfully sought the solution of problems in mechanics, and patiently studied anatomy and, in truth, almost every department of science. But, great as was his insight into the phenomena of matter and motion, and it was perhaps not less than his insight into the fine arts, his work remained without effect, because unknown.

Before Galileo there are but two modern men of science whose importance is capital, Copernicus and Vesalius. The work of Copernicus,[4] though destined finally to tear a veil from before the eyes of men, did not amount to a proof of the heliocentric hypothesis, nor was it at once profoundly influential upon thought. As for Vesalius, he labored upon human anatomy, a subject which has never exerted a wide influence upon the large affairs of civilization. The number of men who, in the sixteenth century and even before, pursued natural science with industry was considerable. But tradition, belief in authority, and the superstitions of the pseudo-sciences of astrology and alchemy, long and successfully resisted the advance of knowledge. Time-honored ideas, nevertheless, had received a rude shock at the hands of Copernicus, and by the year 1600, when Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake, the far-spreading influence of the heliocentric hypothesis, both in its direct hearing, and as an illustration of the power of the untrammeled human intellect, was evident to most thoughtful men.

There followed in the next century such a revolution in thought as has seldom occurred in the whole course of history. To this many factors contributed; the commanding genius of a few great men, Newton, Galileo, Harvey,[5] Kepler, Huygens, Descartes,[6] Bacon,[7] Leibnitz; the growth of algebra, which made possible the invention of analytical geometry by Descartes, and the calculus by Newton and later independently by Leibnitz; the inventions of the telescope and compound microscope, greatly increasing the powers of the eye; finally, that indefinable modernizing of the human mind wrought by the whole Renaissance, which made sound thought once more possible, and for the first time produced in Galileo a man worthy to stand beside Archimedes.





NEWTON'S "PRINCIPIA"



In many respects the seventeenth century is the most interesting in the history of science, and certainly science is the most important human interest in the history of this century. Galileo begins it. "Modern science is the daughter of astronomy; it has come down from heaven to earth along the inclined plane of Galileo, for it is through Galileo that Newton and his successors are connected with Kepler."[8] The investigation of the falling body, and the establishment of the algebraical and geometrical laws of fall by Galileo, joined with Kepler's great discoveries of the laws of planetary motion, and informed by the hypothesis of Copernicus, led to Newton's "Principia,"[9] a work (the only other one by an Englishman) that stands out like that of Shakespeare, towering over all else.

This incomparable book contains all the essential principles of the science of mechanics. Since the year 1687, when it was published, the labor of many men of great genius has only availed to polish, to refine, and to embellish a subject which they could not really extend. In the course of the studies leading up to this work, Newton, incidentally as it were, invented the differential and integral calculus, which became the source not only of countless achievements in mathematics and science, but of perhaps the bitterest controversy in the annals of learning.

The work of Newton in establishing the science of mechanics was dependent upon a variety of other achievements of the century, in addition to the directly contributory labors of Kepler and Galileo. Especially important were the earlier progress of mathematics, marked by the invention of logarithms by Napier and independently by Bürgi, and the above mentioned discovery of analytical geometry by Descartes. Newton's work was also dependent upon the growing power and precision of scientific instruments and measurements.

This development of mechanics from Galileo to Newton is perhaps the best illustration of the method of scientific progress. Upon a vast basis of accurate descriptive knowledge, erected partly by Tycho Brahe and partly by earlier astronomers, observations with instruments of precision and high power, quantitative experiments, and finally mathematical calculations produced in little more than half a century a work which it taxes the highest powers of the specially trained human mind to understand, and which has withstood all criticism for two centuries, the most critical in history.





HARVEY AND THE CIRCULATION OF THE BLOOD



Only less important than that of mechanics was the development of biology in the seventeenth century. William Harvey, supported by the excellent work of anatomists that had begun with Vesalius, but held back by many vestiges of the old superstitious belief in authority and the garbled teachings of Hippocrates and Galen, in the early years of the century discovered the circulation of the blood.[10] After long and most admirable investigations and self-criticism, in the year 1628 he gave this discovery to the world.

It is impossible to imagine a more illuminating contrast between the false learning of the Middle Ages and the sound positive knowledge of modern times than is presented in Harvey's book. For at almost every point the work of Harvey himself has quite as much the modern flavor as that of Newton. The introduction presents the old traditional views on the physiological functions of heart and lungs, and bewilders with its meaningless play with words. There follow upon this the simplest descriptions of observations and experiments, and the soundest reasoning from such positive knowledge, till one feels that he has passed from a dream into reality.

The work of Harvey, like so much of the work of great Englishmen, was isolated, and the full development of biology came somewhat later, in mid-century and thereafter. In this later growth, aided by the microscope and the principles of mechanics, the studies of Swammerdam, Grew, Malpighi, Redi, Borelli, Leeuwenhoek, and others, provided many important data in the most widely different departments of biology. But natural history lacked the great foundation of accurate descriptive knowledge, arranged in order, that astronomy possessed, and, as a result much of the great work which the biological renaissance began was interrupted for a century. Among the feats of seventeenth-century biology were microscopical studies of the anatomy of both plants and animals (Nehemiah Grew, Malpighi, Leeuwenhoek), the beginnings of embryology (Harvey, Swammerdam), mechanical physiology (Borelli) including recognition of the nature of reflex action by Descartes, experimental studies tending to overthrow belief in spontaneous generation (Redi), and even observations on the physiological action of poisons.

In this century, in spite of the admirable work of Robert Boyle, somewhat overestimated in his own day however, chemistry languished under the sway of a false theory. Similarly, heat, electricity, and magnetism were of no great importance, unless the magistral work on magnetism of William Gilbert, physician to Queen Elizabeth, published in 1600, be reckoned.

Two other departments of physical science, however, the study of atmospheric pressure and optics, were more fortunate. Torricelli and Viviani, pupils of Galileo, Otto von Guericke, Pascal, and Boyle investigated the barometer and the pressure of gases and worked up the fundamental conclusions. Optics was investigated by no less men than Newton and Huygens, and at their hands underwent a wonderful practical transformation. But this subject requires a peculiarly subtle theoretical foundation, and the times were not yet ripe even for a Newton to enter the true path of theoretical speculation.





THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY



The great result of seventeenth-century science was to show the world that simple and exact laws of nature can be discovered. At the time of their discovery the most important thing about Galileo's law of falling bodies and Newton's "Principia" was their amazing novelty. Familiarity with such results of science has bred the modern contempt for superstition and anti-intellectual views concerning the phenomena of nature.



It must be confessed, however, that the immediate results of man's new-found confidence in the intellect were often very unfortunate. For there can be little doubt that it was the successes of the Newtonian dynamics and of mathematical analysis which gave the philosophers of the eighteenth century their assurance of the possibility of like simple, exhaustive, accurate, positive, and wholly satisfactory treatments of the most complex of human affairs, including economics and politics, to say nothing of the biological sciences. Vain efforts in such directions consumed much of the best energy of the century, and such striking failures tended to obscure the real progress of knowledge when more modest or at least more simple problems were involved.

There were three principal tasks for eighteenth-century science. The organization of scientific men which had been begun in the preceding century with the Royal Society of London and the Académie des Sciences of Paris had to be widened and enlarged. The work of Newton had to be evolved and spun out finer and finer with the aid of a more and more flexible mathematical art. Above all, the description of nature had to be extended in every direction and classified, as the basis of further progress. In promoting the organization of science Leibnitz is the great figure. In the development of mathematical physics there are to be noted the Bernoulli family, Euler, Lagrange, and Laplace. In natural history Linnaeus stands out preeminent, though Buffon must not be forgotten, and, as the century nears its close, biologists in the modern sense begin to appear.

One achievement of the century could not be foreseen—the creation of scientific chemistry by Lavoisier, aided by Scheele, Priestley and others, a deed hardly second to that of Newton and Galileo in its importance of science and civilization, and far the most important scientific advance of a hundred years.





THE NINETEENTH CENTURY



The last decades of the eighteenth century and the first of the nineteenth were a period of profound change politically, socially, economically, and industrially, and not less scientifically. The scientific renaissance had come in the seventeenth century and culminated in Newton. The succeeding period had sufficed to develop his immortal work and to collect a vast array of facts in the descriptive sciences. At the same time the spirit of positive knowledge had been applied to the steam engine and the arts, and in very different directions had influenced the work of Voltaire, Rousseau, Gibbon, Adam Smith, and many others. However they may have differed among themselves, all these men felt the new forces, and responded to them with novel criticism of religion, society, history, and political economy.

Lavoisier had provided the instruments and methods for a revolution in chemistry quite as great as Newton's in physics. But chemistry differs very greatly from physics in the applicability of mathematics, and a vast experimental edifice had to be raised before, toward the end of the nineteenth century, anything like the completeness of the Newtonian mechanics could be attained in the younger science. Moreover the atomic theory had to be developed, had to be interwoven with the kinetic theory of gases which sees the molecules in endless motion, had to be extended with the help of geometry, before this was possible. Still, a new tendency had formed, which now has become one of the steadiest streams of scientific progress.

Following upon the work of Franklin and Coulomb and many others, the discoveries of Galvani and Volta, of Oersted and Ampere, and above all, of Faraday,[11] in electricity, providing batteries and currents, showing the relationship of electrical to magnetic, chemical, optical, mechanical, and thermal phenomena, constituted another tendency, and both of these have had a profound influence upon the arts. Young and Fresnel created a new science of light. Heat became yearly more important with the development of the steam engine and the growth of physiological and electrical science. The work of Sadi Carnot, Mayer, Joule, Helmholtz,[12] Lord Kelvin,[13] and others led, in the middle of the century, to the principles of thermodynamics, and to the laws of the conservation and degradation of energy.





THE BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES



Microscopical anatomy was revived and, advancing through the work of many trained observers, led to the recognition of the cell as the morphological element of living things, with this as a basis, to the systematic development of the whole of histology; and so to a new embryology and pathology. Thus the names of Schleiden, Schwann, Von Baer, and Virchow have become immortal.

Rigid ideas based upon classification, which had long tottered before the assaults of Lamarck, Goethe, Erasmus Darwin, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, and others, finally fell before Charles Darwin's[14] triumphant conception of natural selection by survival of the fittest, perhaps the most influential idea upon the thought of his time that has ever been put forward by any man. Out of this have grown the study of heredity and, partly through the efforts of Darwin's cousin, Francis Galton, a new doctrine of perfectibility.

In another department of biology, the study of the phenomena of digestion, fermentation, putrefaction, etc., after varying fortunes, culminated in Pasteur's[15] discovery of the role of micro-organisms, confirming the views of Redi and Swammerdam against spontaneous generation. The results of Pasteur's discoveries have now swelled into the greatest material benefit ever conferred by one man upon his fellows. They have led to antitoxins, immunity, and the greater part of preventive medicine, as well as to antisepsis and asepsis (Lister),[16] and so to the principal triumphs of surgery.





THE ORGANIZATION OF RESEARCH



Experimental methods, guided by mechanics, optics, heat, electricity, and chemistry, were now systematically applied to physiology, then to psychology, and, with the help of the cellular hypothesis and the sciences of embryology, evolution, heredity, immunity, etc., they have transformed biology.

Everywhere, if other mathematical methods fail, the statistical method is being applied and in suitable cases, as, for example, life insurance, with great success; thus literally bringing order out of chaos.

Meantime the world has learned that science pays. Accordingly professorships have multiplied, societies have become more numerous, journals are endowed, institutes of research established, the Nobel prizes founded, and a livelihood is provided for large number of workers.

The number of working scientists, if not their quality, has enormously increased. An army has been organized and disciplined, and an amount of work which can scarcely be imagined has been produced. Scientific literature has now become a flood that has to be canalized with the help of special journals of various descriptions devoted solely to its review, description, and orderly classification, in order that it may be utilized at all.

The forward march of science has now become inevitable, like that of civilization itself. This vast army of workers are engaged, with no stake in the outcome, with no concern for the influence of their work upon church or state or any other human institution or interest, according to known and tried and proved rules, by description, measurement, experiment, and mathematical analysis, in multiplying our reliable, positive knowledge of the world around us. Year by year this knowledge grows, by leaps and bounds when commanded by genius, slowly and painfully at the hands of most men, but steadily and surely always.





SCIENCE AND THE STATE



One of the principal results of the extension of science is its incorporation with the state. Astronomers royal have existed for three centuries, but to-day we have Departments of Agriculture with many scientific bureaus, and we badly need Departments of Public Health. Moreover, the vast increase of knowledge of a highly technical character has made it impossible for the executive, the legislative, and the judicial departments of government even to have an intelligent opinion regarding much with which they must deal. Hence the expert is acquiring an importance which is scarcely guessed even by most thoughtful persons, and government by expert commissions and expert advisers of the legislature and the judiciary appear to be inevitable features of the future state.





THE GROWTH OF SPECIALIZATION



The main currents of nineteenth-century science have produced more and higher specialization than ever before. Descartes was philosopher, scientist, and mathematician; some of the great men of the eighteenth century were hardly less so. Even through a large part of the nineteenth century many of the greater men ranged widely over the field of science and mathematics. To-day the force of circumstances has largely changed all that. The chemist is likely to look upon the physicist, or even the physical chemist, with suspicion on account of his mathematical interests. On the other hand, the mathematician, unlike Newton, Euler, and Gauss, is commonly no longer a physicist at all. There are to-day very few men who possess even a superficial acquaintance with all the principal departments of science, and between the work of the astronomer, on the one hand, and that of the anatomist, on the other, there is perhaps no closer relationship than the fact that both employ optical instruments in their researches.

The nineteenth century will ever be known in history for at least two of its scientific achievements—the unification of our knowledge of matter, energy, and life, and the final organization of the army of scientific workers, whereby discovery ceased to be dependent solely upon the individual and became a part of the business of humanity at large, at length and for the first time systematically undertaken.





THE UNIFICATIONS OF SCIENCE



1. Conservation of Energy



The middle of the nineteenth century witnessed the discovery of all three of the great unifications of science. These are the unification of energy by the discovery of the principle of the conservation of energy, the unification of matter by the discovery of the periodic system, and the unification of life by the work of Charles Darwin.

Not for decades after Bolton and Watt, as the result of commercial necessity, introduced the idea of measuring energy in horsepower, was the real nature of the relationship between heat and mechanical power critically examined, save once in a quickly forgotten investigation by Sadi Carnot. But at length the speculations and calculations of Julius Robert Mayer, the admirable experimental researches of Joule, and the profound studies of Helmholtz and others established the principle of the conservation of energy[17]—in short, demonstrated the proposition that energy is one and indestructible, however it may manifest itself as heat, or light, or electricity, or otherwise.

2. Periodicity



Somewhat later the work of Newlands, Lother Meyer, and Mendeléeff brought to light an extraordinary series of relationships, periodically recurring properties, among the elements. It would be impossible briefly to explain this relationship, but a simple analogy may serve to show its nature.

11 12 13 14 15

21 22 23 24 25

31 33 34 35

41 42 43 45

51 52 53 54 55





Giving the numbers above arranged, there can be no doubt, first, that they have been correctly arranged, and secondly, that the numbers 32 and 44 are missing, but have a place in the table. In other words, it is possible to predict the "properties" of the two missing numbers. In like manner, the studies of Mendeléeff showed similar connections among the elements. These could be arranged, as he showed, in the order of their atomic weights, in a table very similar to the above, in which the variation in properties was regular and periodically recurrent, but with certain gaps in the classification. Judging from the elements surrounding such gaps, Mendeléeff predicted the properties of the missing elements in certain cases in which the missing elements have now been supplied by chemical research. The results have invariably confirmed the Russian chemist's predictions, as may be seen from the following data concerning the element germanium: Prediction Observation

Atomic weight 72.0 72.3

Specific gravity 5.5 5.469

Atomic volume 13.0 13.2

Specific gravity of oxide 4.7 4.703

Boiling point of chloride Less than 100° 86°

Specific gravity of chloride 1.9 1.9

Specific gravity of ethyl compound 0.96 Lower than water



Thus it has become clear that the elements are all related to one another. It is not known how to explain this relationship—perhaps they have been evolved in an orderly manner from something else—but, at all events, matter is not only indestructible (Lavoisier), but it makes up a unitary system. To-day we feel sure that we are acquainted with nearly all the stable varieties of matter that exist in the universe, though of course there remain a great variety of arrangements of this matter which are unknown to us.

3. Biological Evolution



The only well-known phenomenon that cannot be completely described in terms of matter and energy is life, with its peculiar characteristics of consciousness and thought. In the year 1859 biology yielded to the unifying idea of Charles Darwin. Many had previously suspected that all living things are blood relations; the discoveries of embryologists in particular had proved that the similarities among living things are far more profound than had been formerly realized. But Darwin provided a plausible explanation of the development of more complex beings by a continuous evolutionary process, and this led to the world's final decision in favor of the hypothesis of transformation.

It is possible that some of Darwin's hypotheses may in the end be discarded, but it appears to be wholly unlikely that the world will ever give up its belief in the evolution of organic beings, in all their multitudinous forms, from earlier and simpler types, and probably originally from one or more exceedingly simple forms.

Finally, the change in the relation of science to civilization, accomplished in the nineteenth century, marks a new epoch in history. For the first time humanity has systematically undertaken the task of conquering the environment. A new organ of the social body, like the financial or the military, has been created and has assumed relations with the other parts of the great organism of modern society.

System replaces chance in the greater part of human affairs, manufacturing, warfare, medicine, commerce itself, have become "scientific"; they advance steadily, ruthlessly, and carry man with them; whither he cannot guess.





↑ See Harvard Classics, viii, 265-266, for another translation of this chorus.

↑ H. C., xxxviii, 364-382, and Lecture IV in this course.

↑ Bacon's "Novum Organum," Bk. I, lxiii.

↑ H. C., xxxix, 52-57.

↑ H. C., xxxviii, 62ff.

↑ H. C., xxxiv, 5ff.

↑ H. C., xxxix, 116ff.

↑ Bergson, "Creative Evolution," translated by Mitchell, p. 335.

↑ H. C., xxxix, 150ff.

↑ H. C., xxxviii, 62ff.

↑ H. C., xxx, 7-170.

↑ H. C., xxx, 173-248.

↑ H. C., xxx, 251ff.

↑ "Origin of Species," in H. C., xi.

↑ H. C., xxxviii, 273-382.

↑ H. C., xxxviii, 257.

↑ H. C., xxx, 173 ff.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

Laverock

P. S. Burton

Mattisse

Billinghurst

ShakespeareFan00

Beeswaxcandle

Londonjackbooks

Mu301

EncycloPetey

廣九直通車





<EOS>The Harvard Classics Vol. 51 — Astronomy


					Lawrence Joseph Henderson





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





II. ASTRONOMY



By Professor Lawrence J. Henderson



ASTRONOMY was destined to liberate the modern intellect from the bondage of the Middle Ages, and by teaching man that the earth is not the fixed center of the universe, but a satellite of one among many stars, to shake the confidence with which he had long regarded the universe as made for him, the earth for his abode, the heavens for his enjoyment. This is the great contribution of astronomy to thought; to civilization it has also contributed some of the most important advances, such as an accurate calendar, the standard of time, and the exact measure of time, sound methods of navigation and geography; and commencing earlier than all the other sciences, it has built up one of the most admirable structures of scientific knowledge.

Astronomy was long the leader among the sciences, and as such gave to the world trigonometry, in part logarithms, and Newton's dynamics. But though astronomical progress has by no means ceased, the accelerated growth of other sciences—first physics, then chemistry, and of late biology—has rendered it less conspicuous. The continued importance of astronomy is, however, well illustrated by the marvelous results of spectrum analysis, while to-day the study of nebulae and of the physics of the sun possesses the highest interest.





HIPPARCHUS AND THE PTOLEMAIC SYSTEM



The principal results of ancient astronomy go by the name of Ptolemy (the Ptolemaic system), but are mainly due to the labors of Hipparchus. Hipparchus knew the latitude and longitude of 150 fixed stars within a fraction of a degree, when, in the year 134 B. C., a new star of the first magnitude suddenly appeared. Encouraged by this extraordinary event, he applied himself diligently to astronomical measurements, establishing the position of more than 1,000 fixed stars. It was no doubt this sound basis of accurate quantitative data, and the familiarity with his subject which such work provided, that led to his great achievements. He discovered the precession of the equinoxes, and measured it with considerable accuracy; he measured the length of the day with an error of but six minutes; but his great achievement was a mathematical device whereby the position of the sun and, with less accuracy, the positions of the moon and planets could be calculated.

The essential features of this device consisted in imagining the sun to move in a circle of which the earth was not quite the center; this is the excentric of ancient astronomy. Another more difficult idea was that of epicycles. These two mathematical ideas did very good service in the work of Hipparchus, for the practical purposes of the calendar. But later, in the hands of Ptolemy, and in the succeeding centuries, they ceased to be arbitrary assumptions, or even mere theories, and in the Middle Ages became dogmas which were held most tenaciously and blindly. As astronomical knowledge slowly increased, it became necessary to make the theory more and more complex in order to fit the facts, and, long before the work of Copernicus, astronomical theories had reached a degree of absurdity that could not have endured in any other age. Yet more than one of the astronomers of antiquity had believed that the earth moves, either rotating on its axis, or revolving round the sun, or both.





THE COPERNICAN THEORY



Copernicus was born at Thorn in Poland (1473) of a German mother. Educated first in medicine, he studied astronomy in Vienna, and he was later in Italy (1495–1505) at the height of the Renaissance. When he returned home, his uncle, the bishop of Ermeland, presented him with a clerical position at Frauenburg. Here for forty years he labored to bring astronomical calculations and observations into harmony, and finally, long after he had become convinced of the soundness of the heliocentric view, published the work[1] which marks the first great step in modern science, a work which he saw for the first time on his deathbed in 1543.



Copernicus showed that all the difficulties which the movements of the planets present would become very much less if the moon were left the only satellite of the earth, and the earth itself and all the planets were assumed to move around the sun. He did not prove—in truth being wise and realizing his own limitations, he did not seek to prove—this hypothesis, but only to present the reasons why it must appear the most probable explanation of the principal astronomical phenomena.

The new doctrine made converts slowly. At first it was opposed by the professional astronomers, with whose time-honored habits it interfered, and who were, for the most part, not competent to understand it. Later the opposition of the great Tycho Brahe worked against it for many years. Still later the opposition of theologians effectually cut off many converts, most notably Descartes. But the discovery of Kepler's laws completely destroyed the Ptolemaic system, and must have convinced nearly all reasonable men of the correctness of that of Copernicus. These famous laws are as follows: The line joining the sun with a planet sweeps over equal areas in equal periods of time. Every planet moves in an ellipse with the sun at one focus. The squares of the times of the revolution of any two planets are in the same ratio as the cubes of their mean distances from the sun.





GALILEO AND NEWTON



The next important step in the growth of knowledge of the solar system was Galileo's study of the laws of fall and the composition of two kinds of motion, like fall and projection, as in the case of a projectile. This was followed by Newton's magnificent extension of gravity from the earth to the whole of space, with the assumption and proof that the intensity of gravitational attraction varies inversely as the square of the distance.

These ideas, combined with Kepler's laws, led at once to the theory of planetary motion and its proof, in Newton's "Principia."[2] The motion of the planets appeared as the resultant of their tendency to go on in the direction in which they were moving (inertia), and their tendency to fall to the sun (gravitation). The problem yielded completely, so far as two bodies are concerned, to the mathematical genius of Newton.

Still the revolution of the earth about the sun was not, by many astronomers, considered to be proved, while some even denied it. For if the earth really revolved about the sun, the relative positions of the stars ought not to appear the same to us from different parts of the orbit. Yet no difference in their places at the two solstices could be detected, although the stands of the observer were separated by a hundred and eighty million miles in the two instances.

James Bradley was the first person to obtain important results from the investigation of this problem of parallax. He found, not, to be sure, a periodic change of the apparent position of the stars that could be explained as parallax, but a different change of position, quite unexpected. This he called aberration, and recognized that it was due to a composition of the motion of the earth and of the light from the star itself, which is analogous to the entry of rain falling straight down, yet into the open front of a moving carriage. Here, nevertheless, was a proof, the more valuable because unexpected, of the earth's motion. It was not until 1837 that Bessel finally measured the parallax of a fixed star, and this finally ended the problem. The whole difficulty had been due merely to the enormous distance which separates us from the nearest of the stars.





SPECTRUM ANALYSIS



A new period in the history of astronomy followed upon the discovery of spectrum analysis by Bunsen and Kirchhoff. At the outset the chemical composition of the sun revealed itself. Later that of the stars became known; still later it became possible to classify the stars on the basis of their spectra, and at length it has become evident that variations in spectra are at least largely due to differences in the age of suns (the length of time during which cooling has gone on), that all stars are probably very much alike both chemically and physically, and that our sun is probably very much like all other stars. The geological doctrine of uniformity has been extended to astronomy.

This results in renewed interest in the nebular hypothesis and in novel speculations regarding the origin of the solar system. In like manner, the problem of the physicochemical nature of the sun, and of the processes which take place within it, assumes great interest; for, if the universe be homogeneous, we may extend our local discoveries to the utmost confines of space. These, however, have themselves turned out not so unapproachable as a few years ago they seemed to be. Certain peculiarities of star spectra enable astronomers to judge of the motion of stars both relative to the earth and in rotation. The behavior of variable stars can also in part be accounted for by ingenious hypotheses.

Thus the old science preserves its youth and promises to continue its contributions to the growth of human understanding.



↑ See his Dedication of his "Revolutions of Heavenly Bodies," Harvard Classics, xxxix, 52–57.

↑ H. C., xxxix, 150, and see General Index in vol. 1, under Newton.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

Laverock

P. S. Burton

Mattisse

Beeswaxcandle

Billinghurst

Londonjackbooks

Mike s

Mu301

Innotata





<EOS>The Harvard Classics Vol. 51 — Physics and Chemistry


					Lawrence Joseph Henderson





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





III. PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY



By Professor Lawrence J. Henderson



THE history of physical science in the ancient world is marked by few notable results. The monochord, earliest of scientific apparatus, led to the discovery of the elements of harmony; geometrical optics in its simplest form was developed; Hero of Alexandria and others familiarized themselves with some of the phenomena of steam and air pressure; even Aristotle, whose influence in this department was on the whole so harmful during two millenniums, possessed much curious and interesting information. But, apart from the great work of Archimedes in mechanics, there is little that bears the imprint of genius in the physics and chemistry of antiquity. Most of the knowledge of the time was no better than a collection of rules of the various trades, such as dyeing, for instance.





THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF ARCHIMEDES



Archimedes established the science of statics. He discovered the law of the lever, that unequal weights are in equilibrium when their distances (from the fulcrum) are inversely proportional to their weights; he developed the idea of center of gravity, and discovered rules concerning it; and he discovered the laws of floating and immersed bodies, including the so-called principle of Archimedes, which enabled him, as the story goes, by weighing Hiero's crown in air and then in water, to detect that the goldsmith had debased the metal. This work of Archimedes, together with his remarkable mathematical feats, marks him as one of the mightiest of human intellects, fully worthy of a place among the greatest of the Greeks.

But, in spite of Archimedes, it was in fragmentary and disjointed form that the physical science of antiquity was transmitted without important change through the Middle Ages to the Modern World. We have already seen somewhat of the additions which the seventeenth century contributed, especially in dynamics, from Galileo to Newton. It does not appear that, apart from the chemical work of Lavoisier, the eighteenth century provided much of the very highest novelty and value in this field. Perhaps the researches of two Americans, Benjamin Franklin and Benjamin Thompson, who became Count Rumford, in electricity and in heat respectively, are among the best which the century affords, as they are at the summit of all American scientific work.





LAVOISIER AND THE RISE OF MODERN CHEMISTRY



Lavoisier's achievement consisted in his recognition of the fact that weight is neither increased nor diminished in chemical changes, and in the elevation of this discovery, which has since been many times confirmed with ever-increasing accuracy, into the guiding principle of chemical investigation, the law of conservation of mass. This advance involved the introduction of the balance as the chief instrument of chemical research. Lavoisier's great success depended, further, upon the fact that he chose the process of oxidation and reduction (the reverse of the reaction of oxidation) for study. Not only is oxygen the most active of chemical elements, if both intensity and variety of chemical behavior be considered, and far the commonest upon the earth's surface, but also the most important chemical processes are reactions of oxygen.

The partial tearing off of oxygen from the carbon of carbonic acid and the hydrogen of water is the first step in the formation of all organic substances in the plant, and the recombination of oxygen with plant products the chief chemical activity of the animal. All this and much more Lavoisier recognized, and thereby revealed the true nature of another great phenomenon of nature. These investigations also disclosed, in the sequel, the chief source of all the energy which is available for the purposes of man.

It is only the energy stored up in the plant (originally the energy of the sunlight shining upon the green leaf of the plant and transformed by the action of chlorophyll) which is contained in all coal, wood, all kinds of oil, including petroleum, alcohol, in short every fuel. And it is exclusively by the union of the fuels with oxygen once more to form water and carbonic acid that this energy is liberated, as in the human body itself, and utilized by man.[1] The resulting water and carbonic acid can then be used over again by the plant. The nature of this cycle of matter was clearly recognized by Lavoisier. This is the basis of nearly all our industry and commerce.





THE WAVE THEORY OF LIGHT



The next great achievement of physical science is commonly regarded as the establishment of the wave theory of light[2] by Young and Fresnel. This view had been put forth in the seventeenth century in a very weighty form by Huygens, and it had even been held before him by the versatile Hooke. On the assumption that light is propagated as undulations, Huygens had given a most satisfactory account of the laws of reflection and refraction; and he had had good success even in his application of the theory to the very difficult problem of double refraction in Iceland spar. Huygens, however, did not succeed in establishing his hypothesis, and Newton's preference for the so-called emission or corpuscular theory of light weighed heavily against the theory of waves.

Newton himself never quite rejected the wave theory of light, and, in truth, at many points in his writings seems strongly to favor it. But there are propositions in his works which led his followers to the positive assertion of the emission hypothesis. The great mathematician Euler, on the other hand, adopted, in the eighteenth century, the undulatory theory. Between his purely theoretical views and the Newtonians there was great controversy.

Again at the beginning of the nineteenth century the undulatory theory was set forth, this time, however, on the basis of exact observations upon the colors of thin plates, by Thomas Young, one of the most versatile men of genius of the country. The contributions of Young were destined to prevail, but, in spite of their soundness, they were treated with contempt by his contemporaries and forgotten for twenty years, until revived by the confirmations of Fresnel. Fresnel, moreover, gradually developed the mathematical theory of this intricate subject, and at length, supported by Arago, he won over the scientific world to the belief in light waves and the luminiferous ether with its strange and paradoxical characteristics.





THE WORK OF FARADAY



Of all the results of scientific experimentation, those of Faraday probably contributed most to the recognition of the connection between the different manifestations of energy, which was a necessary preliminary to the discovery of the principle of the conservation of energy.[3] This is but one of the merits of Michael Faraday, whom many have thought the very greatest of scientific experimenters, and who was certainly one of the noblest and most inspired of men. The work of Faraday is of a richness and variety that baffles description. He was interested in every department of physical science, and he was a great discoverer wherever his interests rested. His earliest work was chemical, following that of his teacher Davy. Here he discovered new compounds of carbon, for the first time liquefied several gases, studied the diffusion of gases, the alloys of steel, and numerous varieties of glass. Next he turned to electricity, his chief interest thenceforth. With a voltaic pile he decomposed magnesium sulphate. This led later to his fundamental electro-chemical law. Choosing purely physical problems, he for the first time produced the continuous rotations of wires and magnets round each other, and in 1831 he discovered induced currents. The greatness of his work in this department has been explained by the most competent of all critics, Clerk Maxwell.

"By the intense application of his mind he had brought the new idea, in less than three months from its first development, to a state of perfect maturity. The magnitude and originality of Faraday's achievement may be estimated by tracing the subsequent history of his discovery. As might be expected, it was at once made the subject of investigation by the whole scientific world, but some of the most experienced physicists were unable to avoid mistakes in stating, in what they conceived to be more scientific language than Faraday's, the phenomena before them. Up to the present time, the mathematicians who have rejected Faraday's method of stating his law as unworthy of the precision of their science have never succeeded in devising any essentially different formula which shall fully express the phenomena without introducing hypotheses about the mutual action of things which have no physical existence, such as elements of currents which flow out of nothing, then along a wire, and finally sink into nothing again.

"After nearly half a century of labor of this kind, we may say that, though the practical applications of Faraday's discovery have increased and are increasing in number and value every year, no exception to the statement of these laws as given by Faraday has been discovered, no new law has been added to them, and Faraday's original statement remains to this day the only one which asserts no more than can be verified by experiment, and the only one by which the theory of phenomena can be expressed in a manner which is exactly and numerically accurate, and at the same time within the range of elementary methods of exposition."[4]



↑ See Faraday on the "Chemical History of a Candle" in H. C., xxx, 86-170.

↑ See Kelvin's account of the theory in H. C., xxx. 251-273.

↑ See Faraday on "Forces of Matter," H. C., xxx, 7-85.

↑ "Encyclopædia Britannica," 9th ed., ix, 30.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

Londonjackbooks

George Burgess

P. S. Burton

Kathleen.wright5

Billinghurst

Laverock

Beeswaxcandle





<EOS>The Harvard Classics Vol. 51 — The Biological Sciences


					Lawrence Joseph Henderson





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





IV. THE BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES



By Professor Lawrence J. Henderson



AMONG the central problems of biology and scientific medicine, those which group themselves about the bacteriological and pathological investigations of Pasteur[1] have been very fully represented in The Harvard Classics. This is due partly to the fact that Pasteur, in providing an explanation of the conditions of life of micro-organisms and of the effects of their activities, contributed many missing links to the science of life, and unified our knowledge of the interrelations of living things. For, in its various ratifications and connections, Pasteur's problem is one of the most extensive, as it is one of the most important, in the whole domain of science. It includes or touches the subjects of fermentation and putrefaction, with the old problem of spontaneous generation and the whole question of genesis, the cause of infectious diseases and the manner of their communication, the nature and mechanism of immunity, including vaccination and antitoxins, and a host of other equally important matters. The work of Pasteur has led to modern surgery through the work of Lister,[2] to a large part of modern hygiene, sacrificing the lives of many investigators in the process; to new methods in chemical industry and agriculture, and it has created untold wealth and saved countless lives.





THE QUESTION OF SPONTANEOUS GENERATION



Aristotle, though his knowledge of embryology in at least one instance—that of the smooth dog-fish—was very great and very exact, appears at times to have been willing to assume spontaneous generation of such large animals as the eel, for instance, as a common occurrence. But there can be no doubt that even in antiquity common sense sometimes felt itself more or less in opposition to such an idea, and it was natural enough for the men of the seventeenth century, when stirred by the new spirit of scientific research, to seek to solve a problem which has always been of the highest interest, and never far from the minds of thoughtful naturalists.

In this great century the most important investigations of such problems were those of Harvey, Redi, and Swammerdam. Harvey's embryological observations are far less valuable than his study of the circulation of the blood.[3] It may, in truth, be questioned if he surpassed Aristotle in any way as an embryologist. But, at all events, his work served to draw the attention of his successors to this subject, and, however vague his ideas about spontaneous generation in certain lower forms of life, he at least took a firm stand in favor of the theory of generation from the egg in most cases.

The work of Redi is of greater interest and importance. He made elaborate studies of the putrefaction of flesh, saw flies lay their eggs therein, and on gauze when the flesh was protected with it. He saw maggots develop in the unprotected meat, while the use of gauze prevented their development. He found that meat of one kind could support maggots which formed more than one kind of fly, and that the same species of fly could come from different kinds of meat. Hence he concluded that the generation of the fly is from an egg, and that there is no spontaneous generation involved in the putrefaction of meat.

Swammerdam, one of the greatest of naturalists, and many others confirmed the observations and conclusions of Redi, and, by observing again and again normal generation from the egg in many other species of minute organisms, did much to undermine the confidence with which the unaccountable appearance of living things was ascribed to spontaneous generation.

Meanwhile the microscopical studies of Leeuwenhoek had revealed the presence of hosts of minute organisms in putrid fluids and, in the eighteenth century, the problem of spontaneous generation was transferred to the origin of microscopic life. This problem in turn was answered unfavorably to spontaneous generation by Spallanzani. His new method of investigation was to seal up an infusion of meat in a glass flask; next the flask was immersed in boiling water until the contents had been thoroughly heated throughout, and then the behavior of the solution on standing was observed. After thorough heating no signs of putrefaction were revealed to the eye or to the nose; no living things were ever visible in the solution under the microscope. But on admitting the air to the flasks putrefaction soon set in and thus proved that the fault was not with the effect of heat upon what is to-day called the culture medium, but that putrefaction had not previously occurred simply because all germs originally present had been killed by heat; sterilized, in short.





THE CELL THEORY AND FERMENTATION



The early nineteenth century made two highly important new contributions to the old problem : the view that all living things are made up of cells as their ultimate structural elements; and, secondly, acquaintance with various digestive ferments contained in liquids like the gastric juice, which are now known to be cell free, yet are capable of bringing about processes resembling fermentation. The latter discovery led at a later date to the distinction between organized (living) and unorganized ferments.

Out of the cell theory have grown the wonderful modern sciences of embryology, largely through the efforts of K. E. von Baer, and pathology, in which Rudolf Virchow has a similar position. The study of ferments and fermentation, and of simple chemical agents which can produce like changes, has led to many new problems and to new methods of attacking old ones.

The chemical aspects of fermentation[4] have a special historical importance because they are especially associated with Pasteur's discoveries. Trained as a chemist, he applied the exact methods of physical science to the biological problem, and solved what had been thought by many insoluble. The studies of Pasteur convinced the scientific world that life as we know it never originates spontaneously, that minute living organisms—microbes, germs, bacteria—are far more active agents in this world than had been guessed. Such organisms turned out to be the essential factors in fermentation of all kinds, save only those due to digestive ferments; it is such organisms which form alcohol, sour milk, make vinegar, etc. Thus in the organic cycle the rôle of the organisms formed of a single cell at length appeared to be a great one. Everywhere present, borne by the wind, they are the true scavengers; for nothing, no matter how small, can escape them. But they are more than this. Wherever they find organic matter, dead or alive, that can support life, they seize upon it; they transform many of the most important waste products of the animal into the food of the plant; they grow within larger living things, and by their growth cause disease, or do not, according to their nature. In short, it is their activity, invisible but omnipresent, fitting in at every point where gaps would otherwise occur, which completes the organic cycle.





IMPORTANCE OF THE WORK OF PASTEUR



At length the chemical processes of life upon the earth were unified. Living things were seen to make up a single community, the great laboratory through which alone matter flows in its everlasting cycle.

The results of Pasteur's discoveries and of the methods of investigation which he introduced are probably already greater than the results of Napoleon's life. The simple great man, who almost alone among the scientists of the nineteenth century equals the genius and virtue of Faraday, shares with the latter the first position among those who have revolutionized our twentieth-century world.

Pasteur's discoveries explained at once such observations as those of Oliver Wendell Holmes.[5] They gave a clue to such mysterious processes as vaccination.[6] And one after another each great pest has yielded up its secret cause—a specific micro-organism—to the disciples of Pasteur.





TOXINS, ANTITOXINS, AND IMMUNITY



Yet such discoveries are but a beginning in the explanation of disease. It soon appeared that there is something vastly more important about a bacterium than its ability to grow in the body—viz., the kind of poison which it yields; else why the difference between typhoid fever and tuberculosis? Thus arises the search for such poisons or toxins, a fruitful and important department of medical investigation. But what of the fate of the toxin in the body—what of this effect upon the host? The result of researches upon this line has been the discovery of antitoxins and the science of immunity.

In another direction the progress of micro-biology has been quite as important. Evidently it is not with the help of toxins that yeast forms alcohol and carbonic acid from sugar; it is with the help of enzymes or soluble ferments. These are imprisoned within the cell, but otherwise they resemble pepsin and the other soluble ferments of digestion. But if the yeast cell performs its chemical functions with the help of soluble ferments, why not all other cells as well? Such is in truth the case. Hence the study of the chemical processes which make up the activity of unicellular organisms has explained much that takes place in every living thing. In short, our progress in the solution of the fundamental problem of physiology, the physico-chemical organization of protoplasm, depends in no small degree upon studies of those minute living things which have but a single cell within which to enclose all the activities of an individual being.



↑ Harvard Classics, xxxviii, 275ff.

↑ See Lister, "On the Antiseptic Principle," in H. C., xxxviii, 257ff.

↑ See Harvey, "On the Motion of the Heart and Blood of Animals," in H. C., xxxviii 59ff.

↑ See Pasteur, "The Physiological Theory of Fermentation," in H. C., xxxviii, 275ff.

↑ See Holmes, "The Contagiousness of Puerperal Fever," in H. C., xxxviii, 257.

↑ See Jenner's original publications on vaccination against smallpox in H. C., xxxviii, 145ff.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

Speight

George Burgess

P. S. Burton

Kathleen.wright5

Londonjackbooks

Billinghurst

Beeswaxcandle





<EOS>The Harvard Classics Vol. 51 — Kelvin on "Light" and "The Tides"


					William Morris Davis





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





V. KELVIN ON "LIGHT" AND

"THE TIDES"



By Professor W. M. Davis



SCIENTIFIC essays, like those by Lord Kelvin on Light[1] and The Tides,[2] should be read several times by the studious reader, and each time from a different point of view. In the first reading, the reader seeks for information offered by the author; in the second, the reader examines the scientific method by which the author has gained his information; in the third, the reader's attention should be directed to the style of presentation adopted by the author in telling his story. After an attentive study of Kelvin's essays from these different sides, many a reader will find that he has made a distinct intellectual advance.





THE ESSAYS AS STATEMENTS OF SCIENTIFIC RESULTS



The first reading of either essay will disclose some of the most marvelous results that have been reached by scientific investigation. For example, it has been discovered that light is of an undulatory nature; that the vibrations of light quiver at the rate of several hundred millon of million times a second; that light is transmitted over interplanetary distances with a velocity of nearly 200,000 miles a second; and that for the transmission at such a speed through what seems to us to be empty space, as between the sun and the earth, there must be a continuous, extremely tenuous, and highly elastic medium, all pervading and universally extended, to which the name, luminiferous ether, is commonly given. It is of course not to be expected that all these and many other results, physical, geometrical, and numerical, can be easily acquired; some paragraphs must be gone over more slowly than others, and many of them should be reviewed more than once; some are difficult of comprehension because they are without the vivid experiments by which they were illustrated in the original lecture; and others because they are compressed into terse statements without explanation. But at the end of what is here called the "first reading," many of the conclusions announced regarding the nature of light should be fairly familiar. Similar examples may be drawn from the lecture on the tides; the larger share of mathematical considerations here encountered may make the second essay more difficult than the first; if some readers do not clearly understand, for example, the statement regarding diurnal inequality (p. 291), they may be excused, for the statement is very brief; similarly, the account of the tide machines (pp. 293–297) is too dense to be really comprehended by a non-mathematical reader, previously uninformed on such matters as harmonic analysis.





THE ESSAYS AS EXAMPLES OF SCIENTIFIC METHOD



The second reading of the essays, directed to an examination of the scientific method employed by the author, should have for its most valuable result a better appreciation of the nature of "theorizing" than most persons possess. The immediately observable elements of such phenomena as light and tides are called "facts"; but an intelligent inquirer is soon persuaded that the facts of observation are really only a small part of the total phenomena. For example, some invisible factors must determine that the noonday sky overhead is blue, and the horizon sky near sunset or sunrise is yellow or red. Or, some unseen factors must determine the strength of the tides and their hour of occurrence varying from day to day. How can light travel at its incredibly rapid velocity? How can the moon cause changes of sea level on the earth? The true answers to such questions would acquaint us with phenomena that, in spite of their invisibility, take place just as truly as the phenomena that we observe. Such unseen phenomena might be called "facts of inference," to distinguish them from "facts of observation." To discover the facts of inference and to demonstrate their connection with the facts of observation is the effort of all theorizing. A theory is, in brief, a statement in which the supposed facts of inference are reasonably connected with the known facts of observation. How is such a statement reached? and when it is reached, how do we know that it is right? To answer such questions fully would demand a whole treatise on scientific method, here impossible; our intention is simply to point out that an introductory understanding of scientific method, much better than none, can be gleaned by a careful second reading of Kelvin's and of the other scientific essays in this collection, with the constant effort to learn how the announced results have been attained.

Notice, first, that for an active mind, it is "impossible to avoid theorizing" (p. 281). The lesson from this is to beware of those so-called practical persons who say they do not theorize; what they really do is to theorize in an unsafe, unscientific manner; for they, like everyone else, wish to understand more than they can see. The desire to theorize should not be resisted, but theorizing should be carefully cultivated and its results should be carefully held apart from those of observation. Notice, second, that, some facts of observation having been gained, the inquisitive mind at once sets about inventing schemes that may possibly include the mental counterparts of the unseen phenomena, or facts of inference, and then proceeds to determine the correctness of the inventions by certain logical devices or tests. That particular scheme is finally adopted as true which stands all possible tests. The tests are mostly experimental in the study of light; they are largely computational in the study of the tides. Notice, third, how ingenious the scientific mind must be to conceive the extraordinary schemes by which the unseen phenomena are supposed to combine with the seen, so as to make a reasonably working total process; how far these mental processes must go beyond the mere determination of visible facts by observation; how active the imagination must be to picture the invisible processes of the invented scheme; and also how free from prepossessions, how docile the scientific mind must be, in order to follow the experimental or computational demonstrations wherever they may lead! Still more important, notice how large a share of the standard content of science, as illustrated by the essays on light and tides, is made up of what are here called "facts of inference," and not simply of facts of observation.





THE MERE OBSERVER versus THE THEORIZER



The problem of the tides may be illustrated by a parable. Once there was a keen, unimaginative observer living on a seacoast, where a perpetual pall of clouds covered the sky, concealing the sun and moon, but where the tides, with their periodic variations, were familiar matters; he would gain a good knowledge of the facts of observation, but he would have no knowledge of their meaning as revealed by the unseen facts of inference. At the same time a philosophical hermit was living alone under the clear skies of a desert continental interior, where he was totally ignorant of the oceans and their tides, but familiar with the motions of the sun and moon, and acquainted with the law of gravitation, in accordance with which the heavenly bodies move; he might from this beginning go on with a series of inferences, or deductions, which would in the end lead him to say: "These distant bodies must exert unequal attractions on different parts of the earth, but the earth is too rigid to yield to them; if, however, a large part of the earth's surface were covered with a sheet of water, the attractions of the sun and moon would produce periodic variations in the level of such a sheet" . . . and so on. After a time, the long-shore observer sets out upon his travels and meets the hermit in the interior desert, who asks him: "Do you happen to have seen a large sheet of water, in which periodic changes of level take place?" "I have indeed," the observer exclaims, "and I was on the point of telling you about the changes of level in the hope that you could explain them; but how did you know that the changes occurred?" "I did not even know," the hermit replies, "that there was a vast sheet of water in which they could occur; but I felt sure that, if such a water sheet existed, it must suffer periodic changes of level, because . . ." The evident point of the parable is that the keen observer and the speculative hermit are both combined in a trained scientific investigator; he performs the two tasks of observation and of explanation independently, as if he were two persons; and his philosophical half finally accepts as true that particular scheme or theory which leads to the best understanding of the facts gained by his observational half.





THE ESSAYS AS MODELS OF EXPOSITION



The third reading is devoted to the style of presentation, and this brings the reader more closely into relation with the author. The object of the third reading is thus unlike that of the second, which considered the author in relation to his problem; while both these are unlike the first, in which the reader did not think of the author but only of the subject treated. A few leading characteristics of presentation in the first essay may be pointed out; the reader may afterward make for himself a similar analysis of the second essay. Note first that the more difficult subject of light is introduced by the analogous and easier subject of sound (pp. 252–256); this is as if the author kindly took the reader by the hand and guided him along an easy path toward a lofty summit. Note again the care which the author takes to lead the reader by easy steps from small to large numbers, and the sympathetic encouragement that he gives: "You can all understand it" (p. 258). Consider the homely illustration of the teapot (p. 259) and the large concept which it aids you in reaching. Recognize the personal touch given by the reference to the famous work of the American physicist, Langley (p. 259); and a little later to the epoch-making discovery of the spectrum by Newton. See again a homely illustration in the mention of shoemaker's wax, and with it Kelvin's quaint allusion to his Scotch birth (p. 264). Passing over several other matters, consider the care which this profound investigator, himself able to grasp the most complicated mathematical formulae, gives to illustrating the nature of ether vibrations by means of a small red ball in a bowl of jelly (p. 271).

The first reading ought to excite a desire to learn more about light; the second, to understand more fully the method of science; the third, to know more intimately some of the great men of the world. Thus the careful reading of one thing creates an appetite for reading many other things: and therein lies the greatest teaching value of any reading whatever.



↑ Harvard Classics, xxx, 251ff.

↑ H. C., xxx, 274ff.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

Londonjackbooks

Beeswaxcandle

George Burgess

P. S. Burton

Kathleen.wright5

Billinghurst





<EOS>The Hunterian Oration, Delivered Before the Royal College of Surgeons of England, on the 14th of February, 1849


					Caesar Henry Hawkins





1849





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





HUNTERIAN ORATION.





THE

HUNTERIAN ORATION,

DELIVERED BEFORE THE

ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS OF ENGLAND,

ON THE 14th OF FEBRUARY, 1849.



BY

CÆSAR H. HAWKINS,

SURGEON TO ST. GEORGE’S HOSPITAL.





LONDON:

JOHN CHURCHILL, PRINCES STREET, SOHO.

MDCCCXLIX.





HUNTERIAN ORATION.





* * *



May it please your Royal Highness,[1]

Mr. President, and Gentlemen;



“As a lasting mark of respect to the memory of the late Mr John Hunter,” this day, the anniversary of his birth, has been set apart for this meeting by his relatives, Sir E. Home, and Dr. Baillie. But of one born in the year 1728, and removed from this scene of his labours fifty-six years ago, and made the subject of comment almost annually for the last thirty-five years,—what can possibly be said in elucidation of his character, and of the value of his scientific investigations, which has not been already rendered familiar to almost every one in this assembly?

None will refuse to recognise in Hunter’s unrivalled museum an evidence of unwearied pursuit of knowledge, and of stupendous labour, almost incredible as the work of one man in the short space of thirty-five years:—few will hesitate to believe, on the concurrent testimony of all who are best qualified to judge by their own eminence in the same pursuits, that in the sciences of anatomy and physiology,—human and comparative, —he effected a kind of revolution, and first pointed out the true path by which alone the mysteries of organised beings in every department, vegetable and animal, can be unravelled:—no one who has sufficiently studied his works and mental powers, will refuse to Hunter a place among those bright luminaries of science, from whom, as from the more distant heavenly bodies, light may still continue to reach us, even for centuries after they have themselves become extinct.

And thus, even with reference to these sciences, the last few years have added much to our knowledge of his real merits:—the publication for the first time, in 1835, of a collected edition of his works, in which his opinions are ably illustrated by the comments of the persons most competent each in his respective path;—and the republication within these ten years of the physiological catalogue of the museum, with much labour and zeal for his character, on the part of our distinguished Conservators;—together with the able remarks of some of those whom I this day follow,—haud passibus æquis,—have demonstrated how vast and varied a fund of original knowledge was actually possessed by him, in many points unsuspected, till brought to light by kindred minds, and explained by the advance of science since his time, and have shown that few men ever lived who could have declared with so much truth in so extensive a field,—

“Libera per vacuum posui vestigia princeps,

Non aliena meo pressi pede.”[2]



And now, by the joint labours of yourself, Mr. President, and of our junior professor, Mr. Paget, within the last three years, the catalogue of the pathological department of the museum has also been almost completed;—illustrated in the same spirit as the physiological, by extracts from Hunter’s unpublished, as well as from his before known pathological writings; and calculated by the arrangement of the collection, to give to the latter an increased interest, by showing the very preparations he was accustomed to employ, when conveying instruction to his pupils by their means. Hitherto the pathological department of the museum has not perhaps harmonised in importance and utility with the rest of the collection, though its merits were not unappreciated by a few select students: at present, however, by numerous purchases on the part of the College, in the last few years, at an expense of nearly £4,000, and by donations from its Members, (far less numerous indeed than they will be hereafter, now that their utility is so much enhanced by classification and display,) the collection has become doubled in numbers and value, since the first brief catalogue in 1830, and may claim at least comparison with any other museum of this branch of science, if indeed it may not already boast of the same undisputed superiority, which the physiological department possesses; and now by examination of Hunter’s own preparations, explained in his own words, may be seen more clearly than before, how close was his attention to diseased function and structure, as well as to the natural condition of all organised beings.

And now also we are in a better position for answering the question which has often been proposed,—granting his great eminence as an anatomist and physiologist, what has Mr. Hunter directly effected, as to the knowledge or the treatment of disease, that surgeons always express for him so much admiration?

If even in this assembly there are some laborious surgeons, whose candid confession would be an acknowledgment that they had never studied the one greatest and most finished of his works, it is the same also with all writings which are profound and full of research;—which require much knowledge, and much application of mind in the reader also, to understand the conceptions of the teacher, engaged in following out his subject in every possible point of view; and which perhaps excite some alarm at the apparent vastness of the labour in prospect, as when Hunter apologizes thus:—“I shall be a little abstruse in the present lecture, which I intend as an introduction to all animal matter.”[3] Of such writings it must ever be, as was said by Bichat of the chief surgical works in Hunter’s time, “One hundred pens retrace every day what fifty have borrowed before them from twenty others, themselves only copyists.”[4]

Neither would a fair inference be drawn as to Hunter’s influence on surgery, if it could be shown that some of his cotemporaries are more often quoted even now than he is, in reference to practical surgery, and that they are even safer guides in some points of treatment; as, for example, when Hunter postponed an inevitable amputation to a remote period after an accident.

It would be easy, on the other hand, to enumerate many facts, which were well known to him, of much interest and importance in the practice of surgery, but which were forgotten and overlooked till again discovered by other observers, after the lapse of considerable time, and at once, with all the force of novelty, indelibly fixed among the settled maxims of practice.

But it is not in such examples of correct observation in individual pathological or practical points that Hunter’s merits lie, nor is it for them that all students in the science, rather than in the mere art of surgery, regard him as their great master.

The estimate of posterity has accorded with that which Mr. Abernethy mentions as the opinion given to him by Hunter himself of his own capacity, when irritated by the neglect or plagiarisms of some of his cotemporaries:—“I know I am but a pigmy in knowledge, yet I feel as a giant when compared with these men.”[5]

Notwithstanding their great practical merits, we look in vain, even in Bichat’s eloquent description of Dessault's surgical improvements, as we do also in the writings of Pott, (each at the head of surgery in their respective countries in Hunter’s time,) for that constant reference to every part of anatomy and physiology, so conspicuous in Hunter, for that depth of thought and varied illustration which fix the attention and necessitate the exercise of the mind of the reader, in dwelling on the doubts and suspicions,—the half-formed theories and hypotheses,—so thickly scattered through his writings;—many of which have been proved by further investigation, with increased collateral knowledge, to have been most sagacious anticipations of important facts.

Leaving to others the application of details, Hunter’s constant aim, as he informs his pupils, was “to explain to them the principles of the art” of surgery;[6] and thus, by reasoning, and comparison, and analogy, to render them fit to cope with unusual and unforeseen difficulties;—it was by enforcing these guiding principles, in a spirit of experimental research, that he contributed to effect a great and permanent change in surgery, pathological and practical, no less influential than that which he produced in physiology;—a change which is still felt unconsciously by every one who enters our profession, because silently actuating most of his immediate instructors.

Hunter himself complained, “ Since I have lectured I have scarcely found a pamphlet without some of my opinions, and often my very language:”[7] and it is in fact the truth. Some of his immediate successors, thoroughly imbued with his spirit, successfully cultivated the science of surgery, and they have been the teachers of their profession; to Hunter’s influence on their precepts, among many causes, are we, I doubt not, largely indebted for that impulse which has been given to surgery among us in the present century.

Nor is this spirit extinct among the members of this College; but I am precluded by the founders of this meeting from dwelling on the labours of many eminent followers of Hunter, because they still move within our observation.



It is my duty, however, to recall to the recollection of my audience the loss sustained by the Council, of whom no less than three “are deceased” since the last anniversary.

Two of these, Mr. Briggs, and Mr. Callaway, afforded a remarkable contrast, physical and mental;—the latter, the active practical man, laboriously occupied in applying his skill for the benefit of a wide circle, by whom his kindness and open manners were extensively appreciated,—the former, the shy, and modest, and retiring student, whose worth was known in a comparatively narrow sphere. Both held several public appointments, but by neither of them was the literature of the profession materially increased; Mr. Callaway, I believe, never published any paper connected with surgery: Mr. Briggs translated Scarpa’s work on Aneurysm, a subject which this Italian pupil of Hunter prosecuted with much ardour, derived, no doubt, from personal interest in the philosophical proposal of his great master for its cure.



Appreciating as I do, however, the zeal evinced a few years ago, by the Council of this College, for the cultivation of literature among its Members, I venture to add that the Library then founded, and since increased at an expense altogether of above £14,000, was a subject in which Mr. Briggs took a very warm interest, and contributed not a little to its efficiency and usefulness.

The Library of the College now contains nearly 23,000 volumes, and is the most complete in the kingdom in every department of science relating to medicine; and although the possession of 2,500 volumes on natural history shows that its character is not solely medical, yet considering its purely scientific nature, the fact that the names of 5,808 visitors are recorded as having availed themselves of its advantages in the last year, demonstrates the justness of the opinion formed by the Council of the literary and scientific pursuits of its members, when such an opportunity as they here enjoy was afforded to them.



The third loss which the Council has sustained is that of Mr. Samuel Cooper, whose surgical erudition has earned for him a wide reputation. Educated at Dr. Burney’s, he began his professional studies exactly half a century ago at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, to which institution he ever retained a warm attachment. Although staff-surgeon in the army, his public services, I believe, were confined to a brief period before the short peace of Amiens, and again after that great victory, by which was purchased the longest peace that Europe has ever known.

Mr. Cooper occupied several high situations, and was for the last seventeen years surgeon to University College Hospital, where his great surgical knowledge, and his kindness and urbanity of manners in the duties of Professor of surgery, procured for him the warm attachment of the students. He was also for many years an examiner of this College; and in 1845 he filled that highest office in its government which you, Mr. President, now occupy. While yet a young man he published a treatise on the diseases of the joints, which had gained the Jacksonian prize of the College; but his fame as a writer depends upon his great work the “Dictionary of Practical Surgery.” Mr. Cooper himself remarks, “This book, imperfect as it is, has been a work of inconceivable labour;”[8] and in truth it presents an immense mass of surgical information culled from every valuable source, not only among the older writers, but also from the best French, Italian, German, and American authors. It has been translated into the three former languages, and republished by our Transatlantic brethren, although they at one time complained that he had not done full justice to their merits.

In this country seven large editions appeared previous to the year 1838. During most of the thirty years preceding that period it formed the text-book of every surgical student, generally in conjunction with his “First Lines of Surgery,” a work which also passed through several large editions, and professed to give, in a more simple form, the recommendations of his own experience. Both works are, however, already in great measure superseded by more modern manuals expressly adapted to the use of the inexperienced; because, although the Dictionary will long continue to be consulted by surgeons as a kind of Bibliotheca Chirurgica, (which its author himself regarded as one of its most valuable objects,) the very richness of its references embarrasses the younger student, from the absence of any guiding voice between them.





Indecision from consultation of too many authorities is not, however, the modern tendency; the change that literature in general has undergone, in the last quarter of a century, has necessarily been felt in our profession. Compendiums and journals usurp the place of the ponderous tomes of antiquity; and among us perhaps, as elsewhere, some may be found of whom it may be said, that they “Pick up their little knowledge from reviews,

And lay out all their stock of faith on news;”[9]



the apparent extent of prospect, of which they thus acquire the survey, concealing from them its superficiality. But, on the other hand, I trust that the impulse which in the same period the advancing tide of knowledge has received, has also reached us, and that by no means an inconsiderable number have become more studious and more scientific; and that in the same manner, as a great change was introduced by Mr. Hunter in the latter half of the last century, so within the last few years a change not less important has commenced, by which pathology and surgery will be as much advanced;—not now by the labours of a single individual, but by the concurrent efforts of a great number of zealous votaries of science; nor yet by precisely the same instruments, but in a similar spirit of experimental research and philosophical induction, over a still more widely extended field.



The great results which I anticipate in pathology and practice, both medical and surgical, are again to be derived in part from further researches into anatomy and physiology, by more minute and accurate examination of both the solid and fluid materials of animal and vegetable beings, and by having especial regard to that general anatomy of tissues which Bichat first raised into notice, but which is at present carried, by the aid of the microscope, and of organic and inorganic chemistry, to a far higher degree of refinement.

At one time some local point of anatomy is determined;—for example, that reflexion of the synovial membrane over the cartilage of joints, which this great physiologist saw only in imagination, is now proved, by tracing the epithelial cells, really to exist in the fœtus, though probably only in fœtal life. At another, some single point of surgery, as when it is shown that the rare union of the fractured neck of the thigh bone cannot possibly be effected by means of the vessels of the round ligament, as was suggested by Sir Astley Cooper, because those vessels are reflected at their looped extremities, without entering the bone at all.

But it is in minuter and more general subjects that modern physiology and pathology are chiefly employed, and now promise to unravel and simplify some of the mysteries, and to explain in a different and more intelligible manner many of the functions of life,—digestion, respiration, secretion and excretion, nutrition and reparation, are all presented to our inspection in a novel form, which gives fresh charms to physiological science, and which is of the utmost importance to clear views of morbid changes of structure and function.



I. The discovery of nitrogenized or albuminous principles in all vegetables has at once removed much of the mystery of the animalization of nutriment, and by showing that the conversion of vegetable substances, free from nitrogen, into albuminous matter for the support of animal life, is not required to be effected in the stomach, the process of digestion becomes much more like simple solution and absorption.

Of little less importance towards our comprehension of the removal from the body of substances no longer required for its use, is the discovery of kreatine in the muscles, which constitute so large a part of all animal bodies, and out of which, as Liebig has shown, urea can be formed,—that subtle alkaloid poison, for the removal of which such constant and careful provision must be made in order to preserve life.

Above all, in interest, is our knowledge of the power of absorption of gases by the blood, and especially of the influence of oxygen in the chemical changes, and removal from the body of both its nitrogenous and non-nitrogenous elements: facts which have modified the doctrines relating to respiration and the production of animal heat, and to nutrition and absorption.



“No chemist on earth,” says Mr. Hunter, “can make out of the earth a piece of sugar, but a vegetable can do it.”[10] The modern chemist, however, in his laboratory can effect transformations, little less wonderful, of one organic product into another. He can convert starch into dextrine or sugar, by adding a little alkali to some pancreatic fluid;[11] or he can change his sugar into fatty matter, or butyric acid, by causing it to ferment with putrefying caseine.[12]

Does not then the physiologist, with infinitely greater clearness and certainty, comprehend how many similar chemical conversions can be effected in the living body, in health or in disease, subject as it is to perpetual changes from the action of oxygen on its solid and fluid materials?—conversions, the previous obscurity of which has been in some measure explained by Mülder’s law of chemical tendency, that is to say, the necessity for the presentation, at the precise period of greatest affinity, of the substances to be acted on; just as some non-telluric bodies, arrested by the earth, become visible to us only at the instant of their destruction by ignition.

That every molecular change of nutrition or secretion—every action of a muscle,—the exercise of every mandate of the will through the nerves,—perhaps every thought of the mind—is accompanied by some disturbance of chemical affinity, some disengagement of electricity, of heat, and occasionally even of light, are now facts familiar to every one.

And may not practice, on the other hand, he made much more effective,—sometimes by prevention of disease, in the important but much neglected field of the chemistry of diet, and other prophylactic measures? and at other times in the treatment of disease, by the use of remedies directed chemically, to the morbid chemical changes known to be in progress; whether in the first processes of reception of food and sanguification, or in the building up of the several textures of the body in nutrition by the new materials, or in the elimination of noxious and effete substances by respiration and excretion.



The subject of the removal from the body of the worn-out materials of the frame, and of substances introduced in excess, furnishes a very remarkable instance—shall I say of want of patriotism, and gratitude to one of the fathers of organic chemistry, or of the influence of a mere change of language on the imagination? There is no doubt that the oxydation of the tissues, in the words of the illustrious German chemist, is altogether included in the secondary assimilation of Dr. Prout; that the latter most fully pointed out the physiological processes subsequent to sanguification, “the formative and destructive changes” in the solids and fluids of the animal economy, with the greater part of what is yet understood of their important bearings on pathology, in reference to the several gelatinous, or albuminous, or oleaginous materials of the body, in the production of cutaneous diseases, of gangrenous inflammations, of calculous complaints, of gout and consumption, disorders; and many other and in many particulars, probably with greater accuracy than Liebig.[13]

It is, however, a common error to mistake fresh terms for new ideas, and merely altered explanations for real acquisition of knowledge.



II. In the second place, the discovery of cell formation, and of endosmose, and exosmose, i. e., transudation and chemical separation through their walls, as affecting not only the primary cells, but every membranous part of an organic body, and even the globules of the blood itself, has materially changed our views of nutrition and of secretion and absorption, with reference to all the fluids of the body, and has made these processes appear like many similar changes effected in liquids by the same laws, out of the living body.

Thus in secretion, one cell selects its peculiar principles, and becomes filled with bile, another with saliva; but the active agent being in every instance a simple cell, it is no wonder that changes in the common liquid, within and without the cell, should affect the cellular endosmose, and that secretions should become, to a certain extent, vicarious; that the elements of bile, for example, should be separated by the cells of the kidney, and of urine by those of the skin. Still more important is the recent discovery of one of the most peculiar products of one excretion, urea, even in the healthy fluids of the body; as in the aqueous humor of the eye, and of both urea and uric acid even in the blood itself, without the intervention of any secreting organ; a circumstance so improbable in the history of secretion, that although, as he informs us, urea was thus seen by Dr. Prout in 1816, he could not believe the fact till it had been established many years afterwards by Dr. Christison and other observers;[14] but chemistry goes even further than this, and through the several stages of cyanogen—cyanide of potassium and cyanate of ammonia,—actually forms this supposed exclusively animal substance without recourse to any organic body whatever.

Experiment upon liquids has already demonstrated some circumstances which affect the end osmotic properties of membranes, and will doubtless before long point out many of those additions to, or subtractions from, the blood, which producing alterations in the endosmose of the cell walls and of the blood globules, will materially affect the fluids of the living body in health or in disease.

Observation tends, however, to diminish the importance of the cells of excretory organs as compared with those concerned in proper secretion, and by showing that they probably transmit effete matter from the blood almost unchanged into the excretory canals, directs attention to the blood rather than to the excretory organs themselves for the origin of diseased excretions.



III. No less altered, in the next place, is modern doctrine relative to the office of the nucleated cells in the building up and support of the solid parts of the body, and their removal when no longer required.

It is interesting to see the nucleated cells, employed in laying down the several tissues, gradually alter their figure to fibrous, or other more organised form; and if Mr. Goodsir be correct, even up to independent animalcular existence; and on the other hand to observe, when their office has been fulfilled, and still more in diseased cartilage, or other tissue, the gradual deterioration of the cells, and their nuclei, in the processes of absorption and ulceration, and other morbid changes.

And thus it is evident, of what importance are the quality of the fibrinous and albuminous constituents of the blood, in which alone (and probably only in the former) the formative cells can be generated; and also their proportion and relations to the globules and other elements of that fluid, which must influence their nutritive functions.

Investigation begins to show some reason for the increase of fibrine in inflammation, with ready formation of organizing cells in the healthy; and for the unorganizable nature of this substance in the granular matter of scrofula, and the poisonous effusions of the intemperate and anxious; and of the fatty degeneration of the weak and aged;—and in time, perhaps, we shall gain some insight into the mysteries of cancer, where the cells and their nuclei, instead of healthy organization, acquire a power of indefinite multiplication and self propagation, till almost every part becomes a destructive, and yet rapidly growing morbid structure.

At the same time it must be remembered here also, as with regard to the fluids, that Schwann’s idea of the universal agency of the cells in organization, has already been acknowledged, by almost every pathologist, to have been a too hasty generalization; and the organization of the fibrine of the blood under some circumstances without the intervention of cell growth, is again recognised as it was taught by Hunter, and followed out more minutely by Mr. Travers and other observers.



It will probably have been observed, even from this short sketch, that the tendency of modern physiology is to explain many of the phenomena of life on simply physical principles. The injudicious efforts of enthusiastic admirers of Hunter, and that even in this theatre, by unduly elevating the “vital properties” so much dwelt on by him, may have led some to turn from his writings as they would from the unprofitable discussions of the vitalists, Stahl or Van Helmont, his immediate predecessors; but Hunter had to combat the extravagancies of the chemical and mechanical physiology of his day, and an examination of the whole tenour of his writings will show, that in reality he kept this part of his doctrines in due subordination to the rest.

And have we no need of caution against similar extravagances of fancy? if we remember in the physiology of the last century, that Borelli calculated the force of the heart to be equal to 180,000 lbs., while Hales estimated it at 5 oz.; have we not witnessed the contest between the Proteine theories of the philosophers of Giessen and Utrecht?

If we wonder at the absurdities of some of the older theories concerning the nervous system, may we not still smile at the extent to which physical analogies are now sometimes carried? As when, for example, we see nervous matter and muscular structure considered as identical with a galvanic battery;—or when Matteucci calculates the quantity of heat and electricity, and therefore of nervous force, produced chemically by respiration and nutrition in a given time, and finds that a man consumes only 1-34th part of the quantity of carbon which a locomotive engine would require to perform the same journey; or that nervous and muscular force, developed by continued galvanic influence in a living animal, from the oxygenation of a given quantity of zinc, is six times as powerful as if the battery had been employed in generating steam;—confessing, however, with regard to his instruments, that “perhaps for a long time to come, man will not attain that degree of perfection which exists in those living machines, which he knows not how to imitate, and can only admire.”[15]

So also when and Barchette, finding by experiment that endosmose takes place through dead animal tissues, between the serum of the blood and solutions of sulphate of soda or seidlitz water, at rest or in motion, would thence explain the action of a purgative salt as being also simply endosmotic, but leave the fact unaccounted for, that a few grains of dry calomel will produce the same effect of copious discharge of serum from the intestinal surface.[16]



It is encouraging, however, for our future progress, to observe, that modern physiologists and pathologists, are not apt to look to a single cause for the actions of so complicated a structure as the animal body; they are not all vitalists, or solidists, or humoralists alone; nor do they wish to explain every thing on merely chemical or electrical or mechanical principles; they know that the tissues may be at fault at one moment, and the fluids at another; that capillaries, nerves, and circulating blood, may all be concerned in one local morbid affection; and that although advancing science has explained much, which was till of late mysterious, both in health and disease, there may yet be some controling power in the living body, which may so modify the operation of physical causes, as to leave much for ever hidden from their finite capacities, for which they can only employ the term, “vital affinities” or “vital actions,” which, to use the words of Dr. Alison, “take place chiefly in that part of the system where the solids and fluids are most intimately mixed, and are continually exchanging particles.”[17]



Again, it will have been observed, from the same sketch, with regard to pathology, that every thing tends at present to give increased importance to humoral doctrines; and nothing more strongly than the recent discovery of urate of soda, by Dr. Garrod, in the blood, in health as well as in gout, leading to the great probability that in many other disorders also, a materies morbi is generated, which must be separated from the system for their cure; sometimes the purification being attempted by nature, though perhaps her very success is fatal, as when the insoluble salt of gout is indeed eliminated from the blood, but is deposited among the solid textures, so as to cripple every joint; at other times, in a more perfect manner by remedial art, and with more certainty and at much less expense to the system, than by simple empiricism.

Iodine has been discovered, by Dr. Christison, in every fluid, even in the aqueous humour of the eye; our remedies may, therefore, be sometimes universally employed, while at other times elimination is sought for through some one or more of the great emunctories of the system, and especially by that excretion by means of which, for obvious reasons, most good has hitherto been effected.

And yet, even in this well-investigated subject, the very changes of health are not fully distinguished from those of disease: my friend, Dr. Bence Jones, for example, informs me of the singular fact that the acids of the urine are gradually lessened, sometimes even to alkalescence, after every meal, and then gradually increase again, till there is more acid than before; so that the degrees of acidity in the stomach, according to its state of fasting or repletion, may probably be expressed by lines, which rise and fall inversely with those which represent the urinous acidity; but with the addition of this anomaly, that when the acidity is greatest in the urine the quantity of uric acid is the least, and the uric acid is in greatest quantity, when the urine approaches to alkalescence.

What numerous discoveries must, therefore, yet await us by assiduous investigation of the many other complicated secretions of the body; above all, what a rich field of inquiry lies open from analysis of the source of all animal substances, whether solid or fluid, normal or diseased,—the blood itself.

Already are we familiar with the terms anæmia, hyperæmia, spanæmia, cachæmia, to designate some of the pathological conditions of this fluid, and yet so completely is our knowledge of the blood yet in its infancy, that the very cause of its colour is still a questio vexata; how little, therefore, can we expect yet to understand of its morbid states.



Mr. Hunter, constantly speaking of the “vital actions” of the solids, was, nevertheless, a humoral pathologist beyond his age. If a philosophic pathologist of the present day, Dr. Williams, proposes the not inappropriate term, necræmia,[18] to explain one of five modes in which the life of the higher animals may be destroyed, Hunter also says, “I even suspect death in the blood can take place independent of the solids, but the death of the solids must soon follow.” He also declares, as is well known, “I am apt to believe the life of the blood begins before it becomes solid, and becomes a part of the body;” and “the blood is as capable of diseased actions as the solids.”[19]

It is curious to trace his great doctrine of “the life of the blood,” at one time exalted to extravagance, next falling into almost universal disbelief; now again, like many of his discoveries, which were scarcely capable of appreciation when first promulgated, brought forward with all the force of novelty, and satisfactorily proved in many points, but in danger, perhaps, like some points of modern physiology, of being carried to a greater theoretical extent than Hunter thought of, or than facts will justify.

Acknowledging the important agency of a fluid containing such a variety of elementary substances in the formation, by incessant change, of new chemical compounds, are we warranted in assuming, with some pathologists, that it can originate within itself, independent of the cells of the vessels containing and circulating it, such changes as produce organic structures? Have we yet sufficient proof that a conversion of the white granules into pus globules can take place in and by the circulating blood, constituting a real pyæmia? And if we find organised encephaloid matter in the recent lymph of serous effusions, and in the coagula in the veins of cancerous tumours, are we yet warranted, as Cruveilhier and other pathologists have done, in investing the white or the red globules, or any single component part of the blood, with vital formative properties analogous to those of the cell-germs of organic structures,—a step far beyond the degree of vitality assigned by Hunter to the blood?



The marvellous discoveries of the last quarter of a century, and the rapid progress observed in every art of life, may, however, excuse some over confidence in individual experience, some hasty publication of theories and speculations, based on imperfect observation, and sometimes supported by very illogical reasoning,—“Omnia non properanti clara certaque sunt, festinanti improvida et cæca,”[20] is, however, a true maxim, and those who are inclined to an indiscriminate adoption of every novelty, and who find the bold and specious theoriser more seductive than the calm and cautious philosopher, and an unknown but foreign name more potent than one more familiar, but of immeasurably greater real weight, will do well to remember the forty years of laborious investigation spent by Hunter on his work on the blood and inflammation, canvassed, and criticised, and altered by a committee of his friends, and scarcely ended with his own life.



On the other hand, if Harvey and Hunter were thought, by their cotemporaries, to be enthusiasts, whose imagination was not kept in check by their judgment, it cannot, I think, be said with truth, that there is now displayed any want of readiness to investigate suggestions in practice, or in the sciences connected with it, which are presented on adequate authority, or which are not inconsistent with rational principles: in fact, the portals of medical science are so widely thrown open, that any indisposition in those who occupy them to test alleged discoveries would soon he overpowered by public impatience at their apathy.

There was nothing, for example, contrary to physiological principles in the idea that gaseous substances, like ether, and subsequently chloroform, should quickly be absorbed into the blood; and therefore how widely and universally was the chance discovery of an American dentist, confessedly ignorant of chemistry, tried by the surgeons of this country! Wonderful indeed, and of incalculable importance to mankind, is this discovery of the all-pervading influence of subtle poisons, in a few seconds overpowering consciousness and sensation and voluntary movement, and proving, by daily experiment, not on the lower animals, but on living man, how close are the confines of life and death, and yet safely used in the earliest infancy, or in the most advanced age; destroying all suffering and all apprehension of it in some of the most fearful circumstances of life, and at the same time diminishing their fatal effects.

If, indeed, I am justified in applying the term chance to the discovery of anæsthetic agents, instead of admiring the preference given by a higher power to so humble an instrument, rather than to the science of Sir Humphrey Davy, who, by a remarkable anticipation, nearly half a century ago, actually proposed one of these substances, nitrous oxyde gas, “as a means of destroying physical pain during surgical operations.”[21]

Nor are such investigations confined to modern opinions or discoveries, but truth or error are sought for in questions long considered as demonstrated. I would instance the fallacies, proved by Dr. G. Burrows to exist in Dr. Kellie’s experiments, on the influence of atmospheric pressure on the circulation of the brain,—so important in reference to the treatment of the injuries and diseases of that organ;—and the revival of pressure as a safer and easier mode of cure for aneurysms of the extremities, previously laid aside because it had been erroneously concluded, by mere inference from analogy, that total and continued cessation of the circulation of blood in the tumour was necessary for its coagulation.



It has been said by Humboldt that, “excited by the brilliancy of new discoveries, and fed with hopes, of which the delusiveness is not discovered till late, every age dreams that it has approached near to the culminating point of the knowledge and comprehension of nature.”[22] I am, myself, however, well aware of the gradual, and often slow progress made by science when it depends in part on accumulation of facts, and how difficult it often is to perfect a single point which subsequently appears exceedingly simple. It would seem almost inexplicable to us, that Mr. Hunter should have failed to recognise the right method of applying the ligature in his operation for aneurysm, did we not remember how long afterwards Scarpa continued to apply the large and numerous ligatures which he had seen first used, and how very recently so experienced a surgeon as Dupuytren included the vein and artery in the same ligature, when Brasdor’s operation on the distal side of the tumour was revived in this country by Mr. Wardrop.

I am well aware, also, that so much still remains, and must ever remain, unknown regarding the animal frame, that although it is wrong to call medicine entirely a conjectural art, yet it cannot be elevated to the rank of an exact science. The wisdom of experience, which is rational empiricism, should be felt in ours as in other professions, and there must still be room for theory and variety of opinion. It is related of Hunter, that to a pupil who remarked to him that he had said differently on the subject last year, he replied, “Never mind what I then thought, I will tell you my present opinion.” In this respect, at least, Hunter is imitated by his successors. Notwithstanding the long existing confidence of the navy in the efficacy of lime juice and other acids, even potash, although so opposite, has recently been recommended for the cure of scurvy,[23] now so curiously revived, after it had almost disappeared from the catalogue of disease;—who can glance at the endless variety of strongly vaunted remedies for the still more formidable epidemic once more visiting these lands, without exclaiming with the dramatist,

“Fecistis probe,

Incertior sum multo quam dudum.”



But on the whole there is much ground for encouragement and hopeful expectation in the spirit with which physiology and pathology are at present cultivated; and if some are hasty and visionary, and others incredulous, and laudatores temporis acti, there is, I believe, among the members of our profession, more general soberness, and candour, and diffidence, and earnest search after truth, than at any former period, acting, moreover, under much more favourable circumstances.



It was said of geographical discovery, by the historian of America, “During the course of the 15th century mankind made greater progress in exploring the state of the habitable globe than in all the ages which had elapsed previous to that period. . . . . In comparison with events so wonderful and unexpected, all that had hitherto been deemed great or splendid faded away and disappeared. Vast objects now presented themselves. The human mind, roused and interested by the prospect, engaged with ardour in pursuit of them, and exerted its powers in a new direction.”[24]

Similar to this is the rapidity with which general science advances at the present time; every day does some new discovery astonish the world; and fresh points of contact, and new links of connexion, between our own and various collateral sciences, become evident. It cannot be but that the increasing flood of light, which is shed over general science, should in some measure illuminate medical science also.

Surely I have said enough regarding chemical investigation to disprove the estimate formed by an excellent practical teacher, when he says, “As to any benefit derived from analytic chemistry in solving the problems of vital action, or elucidating the functions of the various organs, in health and disease, they may be said to be few, and unimportant, and inconclusive.”[25]

Nor can I agree with those, by no means few in number, who, remembering the errors of the supposed discoveries of the early part of this century, by means of the compound microscope, experience an equal distrust of the simpler achromatic lenses of the present time, as assisting the anatomist and chemist; although, in fact, the microscopical descriptions of Leuwenhoek or Boerhaave, a century ago, from their single glasses, are still accurate and true.

The Microscope appears at present to be effecting changes in our knowledge of nature, no less wonderful than those views, which similar instrumental improvements are opening to our senses through the telescope; I know not which extreme in magnitude is most calculated to excite our admiration and our reverence for our common Creator—the contemplation of the estimated 18 millions of telescopic stars in the milky way, or the 40,000 millions of silicious shells of Galionellæ, according to Ehrenberg's calculation, in a single inch of polishing slate![26]



With more moderate views of its utility, perhaps, than some may entertain, the Council have not been unmindful of the benefits which anatomy, physiology, and surgery may derive from the use of the microscope. They have availed themselves of the peculiar talents, for this purpose, of their assistant conservator, Mr. Quekett, to institute an annual course of demonstrations, the value of which is attested by the presence of an increasing number of the members of the College.

They have purchased a large number of beautiful preparations of minute structure, both natural and morbid; and at no trifling cost they have commenced the publication, of what, under the name of a catalogue, is in reality a splendid series of several volumes of engravings, every figure in which, traced by means of the Camera Lucida, presents, as I know by official inspection, not a mere resemblance, destitute of exact measurement and proportion, and therefore open to dispute, but like the daguerreotype portrait, possesses the undoubted merit of faithfulness and truth. The first volume, now on the eve of completion, will, in fact, serve (without the necessity of reference to the collection itself) as a complete treatise of general minute anatomy and physiology; and the whole work, I trust, will reflect credit on the College.



Even the more stationary branches of physical science have, within these few years, contributed something towards medicine; as, for example, the stethoscope, the hydrostatic bed, the ingenious spirometers of Hutchinson and Sibson, and the immoveable dextrine or gum splints, so invaluable in the treatment of fractures and diseased joints. Much more, then, may we expect for pathology and practice, from those sciences, whose progress has been so rapid, as almost to exceed belief.

Take, for example, the subject of electricity;—even within these few months, two small plates of zinc and copper, united by a copper wire, and wrapped on a diseased limb by means of moistened linen, have been employed—to restore motion to a palsied limb; to produce an issue under the zinc, while the copper plate remains harmless; to cause, on the one hand, a healthy action in an indolent ulcer, and on the other, to destroy the vitality of a morbid growth.[27]

How fertile a field of inquiry is probably open from our gradually increasing knowledge of the varying conditions of the same electric power in relation to its atmospheric influence on the whole of the animal and vegetable economy; and therefore, probably, in the production of disease—especially those of formidable epidemic kind;—whether this electric power be traced in its regular diurnal variation, or in the awful explosion of the thunder cloud, or in the silent magnetic storm, unnoticed save in the observatory, and yet affecting a large portion of the globe;—even the mere form, not of the mountains, but of the lesser works of man, disturbing the electric relations on the earth’s surface;—if Professor Schonbein is correct in his detection, by means of iodide of potassium, of the continual emanation of Ozone from pointed bodies into the atmosphere.[28]



But may I venture to ask, whether we may not derive a useful lesson for our professional studies from considering and imitating one element of success, in the mode in which some of these sciences are cultivated. In reading the works of adventurous voyagers, such as the latest of them, Sir James Ross, we cannot but be struck with interest by the numerous directions, in which the varied knowledge of such men is brought to bear on science; the magnetism and structure of the earth,—the temperature and composition of the waters at a depth as great as the summit of the Andes,—the different vegetable and animal productions of land and water,—the tidal movements,—the appearance of the heavenly bodies, and numerous other subjects of interest and importance. But if such observations are carried on amid the dangers of the Antarctic circle, in the same manner and often at the same fixed moment, are corresponding records made by others, in concert and agreement with them, in the Arctic regions, in the Tropics, and in the eastern and western hemispheres; and the nature and method of these investigations are previously considered and deliberately agreed upon, by men most eminent in each of these several pursuits; by whom, also, subsequently, the results of these inquiries are anxiously compared and analyzed, and their value duly weighed.

Would not the stimulus of some such concert and controlling power as I have alluded to in others, advance medical science also, more steadily, step by step, in the right direction, and at the proper time, through the combined efforts of many now isolated labourers? Would it not check many crude and ill-digested hypotheses, prevent the repeated revival of disproved facts and exploded theories, and give a higher value to original discoveries?

Would not, especially, such a system of co-operation work for good in public medical institutions? In each of the different hospitals of this metropolis, for instance, there is much local traditionary knowledge of intrinsic merit, which is confined to its own pupils—in each there are peculiar modes of treatment, which are not always different roads leading with equal advantage to the same end;—nay, their doctrines are sometimes so opposite, that a form of tumour which is regarded in some schools as cancerous and constitutional, is considered in others as fibrous and purely local.

The large scale on which science and practice are in them combined and publicly administered, makes hospitals the only safe standard of statistical information. Private experience is too limited, and the effects of treatment recorded in medical writings, greatly too successful, to express the whole truth. It could not be, but that the united and publicly known results of hospital experience, preserved on one concerted and uniform plan, were it only for the short period of a few years, would afford a mass of most valuable information, now in great measure lost or insulated, which would enable those, who have the peculiar taste and talent necessary for the very difficult task of statistical analysis, to solve a great number of most important questions in medical and surgical practice, in which, therefore, comparative certainty would take the place of the ever-changing aspect of personal experience.



It is very gratifying, however, to witness an increasing co-operation, and appreciation of each other's merits, among the cultivators of science in different nations; and doubtless we must acknowledge ourselves largely indebted to other countries, particularly to the Germans, for much of that minute pathology to which I have drawn a passing attention this day.

It is pleasant to see the medals of our Royal Society awarded to Berzelius, Matteucci, Schwann, Dumas, and Liebig, for the labours, by which they also have forwarded medical science, and to see a British philosopher, Sir David Brewster, fill that honorable place in the French Institute, which has recently been vacated by the great Swedish chemist, Berzelius.



Let me observe, in conclusion, that it is also gratifying to witness an increasing sense of the benefits, and the pleasures, which may be derived from scientific knowledge by persons in every rank of life,—a sense which has been constantly evinced by the Illustrious Personage, whose love for science has prompted him this day to honour our theatre with his presence.

No doubt, Sir, our President will have expressed to you, better than I can do, the deep sense of your Royal Highness’s condescension, which will be felt, not only by this assembly, but by every member of this College.

I will, therefore, only presume to add, that as it is a pleasure to almost every Englishman to see the Prince Chancellor of one of our ancient Universities assist in giving to its inmates that union of modern science and knowledge with classical learning and mental culture, which a conviction of its importance had previously induced him to encourage in the younger students of that great Seminary, which almost forms a part of the palace of our Sovereigns;—so is it also the prayer of every Englishman, that the force of parental example may have its full influence upon those still more youthful descendants of a long line of Princes, whose personal character, thus trained would add stability to the throne itself; even if there should hereafter arise, with fearful rapidity, such an overthrow of governments and dynasties as it has been our fortune, under Divine Providence, to sympathise with, though not to share.



↑ H. R. H. The Prince Albert honoured the College by his presence on this occasion.

↑ Hor. Ep. lib. i 19

↑ Works, vol. i. p. 211.

↑ “Cent plumes retracent chaque jour ce que cinquante avoient emprunté avant elles, de vingt autres elles-mêmes copistes.”—Œuvres Chirurgicales de Dessault, T. 1, vi.

↑ Abernethy’s Physiological Lectures, p. 199.

↑ Works, vol. i. 208.

↑ Ib. p. 210.

↑ Preface to third edition.

↑ Churchill.

↑ Hunter’s Works, vol. i. p. 217.

↑ Matteucci. Lectures by Pereira, p. 104.

↑ Liebig’s Animal Chemistry, p. 113, third edition.

↑ See especially the Introduction to Dr. Prout’s work on “Stomach and Urinary Diseases.” 3rd Ed.

↑ Prout on Stomach and Urinary Diseases, 3rd Ed. p. lxxiii.

↑ Matteucci, op. cit. p. 325, 326.

↑ Matteucci, op. cit. p. 73.

↑ Outlines of Pathology.

↑ Williams’s Principles of Medicine, p. 464.

↑ Hunter’s Works, vol. i. pp. 231—233.

↑ Livy.

↑ Researches, Chemical and Philosophical. Works by Dr. Davy, vol. iii. p. 329.

↑ Humboldt’s Cosmos, by Col. Sabine, vol. ii. p. 357.

↑ Dr. Garrod, on the nature, cause, and prevention of Scurvy; Edinb. Monthly Journal of Medical Science, Jan. 1848, p 457.

↑ Robertson’s History of America, book 2, p. 141, 8vo. Ed.

↑ Graves’s Clinical Medicine, p. 30.

↑ Humboldt’s Cosmos, voi. i. p. 140.

↑ Medical Gazette, July 7, 1848.

↑ Medical Gazette, Oct. 1848.





This work was published before January 1, 1930, and is in the public domain worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

VGPaleontologist

Duckmather

Rajasekhar1961

Sp1nd01

Rocket000

Boris23

KABALINI

Bromskloss

Tene~commonswiki

AzaToth

Bender235

PatríciaR





<EOS>"N" Rays


					Prosper-René Blondlot





1905





Exported from Wikisource on September 29, 2025





"N" RAYS

A COLLECTION OF PAPERS COMMUNICATED TO THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES

WITH ADDITIONAL NOTES AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF PHOSPHORESCENT SCREENS

BY

R. BLONDLOT

CORRESPONDENT OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE

PROFESSOR IN THE UNIVERSITY OF NANCY

TRANSLATED BY

J. GARCIN

INGÉNIEUR E.S.E., LICENCIÉ-ÈS-SCIENCES



WITH PHOSPHORESCENT SCREEN AND OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS



LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON

NEW YORK AND BOMBAY

1905



All rights reserved





TABLE OF CONTENTS



PAGE



Preliminary Notice



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

vii



Introduction by the Translator



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

ix



On the Polarization of "X" Rays



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

1



On a New Species of Light



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

7



On the Existence, in the Radiation Emitted by an Auer Burner, of Rays Transmissible Through Metals, Wood, etc.



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

13



On New Sources of Radiations Transmissible Through Metals, Wood, etc., and on New Actions Produced by These Radiations



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

18



On the Existence of Solar Radiations Capable of Traversing Metals, Wood, etc.



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

24



On a New Action Produced by "N" Rays, and on Certain Facts Connected with These Radiations



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

28



On New Actions Produced by "N" Rays; Generalization of Phenomena Already Observed



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

34



On the Storing of "N" Rays by Certain Bodies



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

38



On the Strengthening Action of a Beam of Light on the Eyes, When the Beam is Accompanied by "N" Rays



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

43



On the Property of Emitting "N" Rays Conferred on Certain Bodies by Compression, and on the Spontaneous and Indefinite Emission of "N" Rays by Hardened Steel, Unannealed Glass, and Other Bodies in a State of Strained Molecular Equilibrium



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

48



On the Dispersion of "N" Rays and on Their Wave-Length



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

53



On the Photographic Registering of the Action Produced by "N" Rays on a Small Electric Spark



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

61



On a New Species of "N" Rays



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

68



On Peculiarities Presented by the Action Which "N" Rays Exercise upon a Dimly Lighted Surface



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

72



On the Comparative Action of Heat and "N" Rays on Phosphorescence



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

74



Complementary Notes



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

77



Instructions for Making Phosphorescent Screens



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

79



How the Action of "N" Rays Ought to be Observed



................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

82





 This work is a translation and has a separate copyright status to the applicable copyright protections of the original content.



Original:



This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1930.



* * *



The longest-living author of this work died in 1930, so this work is in the public domain in countries and areas where the copyright term is the author's life plus 94 years or less. This work may be in the public domain in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the rule of the shorter term to foreign works.





Translation:



This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1930.



* * *



This work may be in the public domain in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the rule of the shorter term to foreign works.





PRELIMINARY NOTICE



The present volume contains the memoirs on the subject of "N" rays, communicated to the Academy of Sciences by Prof. R. Blondlot. The papers have been reprinted exactly as they were originally published in the Comptes Rendus of the Academy. The notes at the end were added later, with the object of throwing light on certain points which were obscure at the time the papers were communicated to the Academy.

The title of the first memoir in this collection, "On the Polarization of 'X' Rays," will hardly cause astonishment when it is realized that the study of the "X" rays led the author to recognize the existence of radiations of a totally different character. To these he gave the name of "N" rays. Before the distinction of these two kinds of radiation was made, some confusion was bound to arise between the phenomena appertaining to each. In particular, the preliminary researches which the author had made[1] on the velocity of propagation of "X" rays apply in reality not to "X" rays, but to "N" rays. He had found that the velocity of propagation was the same as that of Hertzian waves, and consequently of light. Since the properties of "N" rays, taken in their entirety, do not leave any doubt that these rays are a variety of light, this determination of their velocity is nothing more than a verification of an assured fact. Nevertheless, this verification seemed not altogether superfluous; it proves at least that the experiments have been carried out with care.



↑ Comptes Rendus, t. cxxv. pp. 666, 721, 763.





* * *





INTRODUCTION BY THE TRANSLATOR



In writing this English version of Blondlot's communications to the French Academy, the translator's constant endeavour has been to preserve that simplicity and straightforwardness which render the original a model of scientific exposition. That this object has been attained he will not venture to assert, but he hopes that, at any rate, the reader will be enabled to follow the successive stages of thought in the mind of the discoverer as he progresses from experiment to experiment in a hitherto unexplored domain. If this hope be fulfilled, the book will be welcome not only to those who desire to make acquaintance with "N" rays, but also to all lovers of scientific research, as well as to beginners who wish to attain to scientific methods.

The translator has to thank sincerely Professor Reinold, who has been kind enough to revise the translation, and suggest several valuable improvements.





"N" RAYS

On the Polarization of "X" Rays (Feb. 2, 1903).

Note 1.



Hitherto the attempts made to polarize "X" rays have remained fruitless. I asked myself whether "X" rays emitted by a focus tube are not polarized as soon as emitted. I was led to put to myself this question by considering that the conditions of asymmetry which should exist for the polarization of such rays are in this case exactly satisfied. For each ray is generated from a cathode ray, and the two rays define a plane; thus, through each ray emitted by the tube a plane passes, in which, or normally to which, the ray may well have special properties, this being, in fact, an asymmetry characteristic of polarization. Now, if this polarization exists, how can the fact be ascertained? It struck me that a small spark, such as I used in my researches on the velocity of propagation of "X" rays, might perhaps in this case play the part of analyzer, inasmuch as the properties of a spark may be different in the direction of its length, which is also that of the electric force producing it, and in directions normal to its length. Starting from this, I arranged an apparatus as shown in the accompanying diagram, so as to obtain a small spark during the emission of "X" rays.

A focus tube is connected to an induction-coil by wires BH, B'H', covered with gutta-percha (Fig. 1). Two other wires, also covered with gutta-percha, AIc and A'I'c', terminate at A and A' in two loops, which surround BH and B'H' respectively; a bit of glass tubing, not shown in the figure, keeps each loop separate from the wire which it surrounds. The wires AI, A'I are then twisted together, and their sharply pointed ends, c and c', are fixed opposite each other, at a very small distance, adjustable at will, so as to form a small spark-gap. By virtue of this disposition, the electrostatic influence exercised by the wires BH and B'H' on the loops A and A' produces

at each break of the current in the coil a small spark at the gap cc', at the same time as "X" rays are being emitted by the tube. Owing to the flexibility of wires, AIc, A'I'c', the straight line cc', along which the spark occurs, can be set in any direction we please. A sheet of aluminium foil, 40 cms. square, is interposed between the tube and the spark, so as to prevent any direct influence of the electrodes of the tube on cc'. In order to define easily the relative positions of the tube and the spark cc', take three rectangular axes, of which one, Oz, is vertical.

Fix the focus tube so that its length, and, consequently, the pencil of cathode rays, coincides with OY, the anticathode being placed near the origin, and sending "X" rays in the positive direction of OX.

Place the gap cc' at a point on the positive side of OX, so that its direction is parallel to OY. The spark being properly regulated one observes that the "X" rays act upon it in such a way as to increase its luminosity, for the interposition of a sheet of lead or glass manifestly diminishes the brightness.



Now, without altering the position of the gap, turn it so that it comes parallel to OZ, i.e. normal to the cathode rays. The influence of the "X" rays on the spark is then seen to disappear, and the interposition of a lead or glass plate causes no change in its brightness.

"X" rays have therefore a plane of action, which is the one passing through each "X" ray and the cathode ray which gives rise to it. If the direction given to the spark-gap is intermediate between the two above mentioned, the action is seen to diminish from the horizontal position to the vertical.

The following is another experiment, still more striking: if the spark is made to turn about OX, parallel to plane YOZ, the spark is seen to pass from a maximum brightness when horizontal to a minimum when vertical. These variations of brightness are similar to those observed when a pencil of polarized rays traverses a rotating Nicol's prism, the small spark playing the part of analyzer. The pencil of "X" rays presents the same asymmetry as a pencil of polarized light. According to Newton's definition, it has sides differing from each other; in other words, it is polarized in the complete sense of the term.

The phenomenon is easy to observe when the spark is well regulated; this means that the spark must be very small and faint.

If the focus tube is made to turn about its axis, which is parallel to the cathode rays, the observed phenomena do not change, so long as "X" rays reach the gap. The plane of action is thus independent of the orientation of the anticathode, being always the plane passing through the "X" rays and the generating cathodic rays.

The spark being kept in this plane, and turned round from the position in which it is at right angles to the "X" rays to that in which it is parallel to them, we observe that the effect of the "X" rays on the brightness of the spark is a maximum in the first position, and diminishes to nothing in the second.

Now, an "X" ray and its generating cathodic ray only determine a plane when their directions are different. Again, amongst the emitted "X" rays, some are in a direction very nearly the same as that of the cathode rays, being those which graze the cathode. One should expect these to be very incompletely polarized; and, indeed the small spark enabled me to confirm this.

I noted several important facts, which, however, I will merely allude to in the present paper. Quartz and lump-sugar rotate the plane of polarization of "X" rays in the same sense as that of light. I obtained rotations of 40°.

Secondary rays, styled "S" rays, are also polarized. Active substances rotate the plane of polarization of these rays in a sense contrary to that of light. I observed rotations of 18° (note 2).

It is extremely likely that magnetic rotation also exists for "X" rays as well as for "S" rays. One can also surmise that the properties of these rays, with reference to polarization, extend to tertiary rays, etc. I intend shortly to publish the results at which I have arrived concerning these different points.





On a New Species of Light (March 23, 1903).



The radiations emitted by a focus tube are filtered through a sheet of aluminium foil or a screen of black paper, in order to eliminate the luminous rays which might accompany them. While studying these radiations by means of their action on a small spark, I discovered that they are plane-polarized as soon as emitted. I further proved that when these radiations traverse a plate of quartz in a direction at right angles to its axis, or a lump of sugar, their plane of action undergoes a rotation just like the plane of polarization of a pencil of light (see pp. 5 and 6).

I then asked myself if a rotation could also be obtained by passing the radiations of the focus tube through a pile of Reusch mica sheets. I observed, in fact, a rotation of from 25° to 30° in the same direction as that of polarized light. This action of a pile of micas made me at once infer that a single sheet of mica must act, and that this action must be depolarization, or, rather, the production of elliptic polarization; this is indeed what occurs. The interposition of a sheet of mica, set so that its axis makes an angle of 45° with the plane of action of the radiations emitted by the tube, destroys their rectilinear polarization, for their action on a small spark remains sensibly the same, whatever be the direction of the spark-gap. If a second sheet of mica is interposed, identical with the first, so that the axes of the two sheets are perpendicular to each other, rectilinear polarization is re-established. This result can also be obtained by the use of a Babinet's compensator. Consequently, we are dealing with elliptic polarization.

Now, if the sheet of mica changes rectilinear into elliptic polarization, such a sheet must be doubly refractive for the radiations thus transformed. But if double refraction exists, a fortiori simple refraction must exist; and I was thus led to examine whether, in spite of the fruitless attempts to discover the refraction of "X" rays, I could not obtain a deviation by a prism. I then arranged the following experiment: a focus tube sends through an aluminium screen a pencil of rays, limited by two vertical slits cut in two parallel sheets of lead, 3 mms. thick. The small spark is placed on one side of the pencil at such a distance that it cannot be reached, even by the penumbra; this is ascertained by proving that the interposition of a sheet of lead causes no diminution of its brightness. Now let us interpose in the pencil an equilateral quartz prism, with refractive edge on the side away from the spark. If the prism is properly set, the spark becomes much more brilliant; when the prism is removed, the spark reverts to its former faintness. This phenomenon is certainly due to refraction, for if the setting of the prism is altered, or if the prism is replaced by a plate of quartz, no effect is observed. The experiment may also be carried out in a different manner: the pencil is first made to impinge directly on the spark, then it is deviated by means of the prism, and the brightness of the spark wanes. If, now, the spark is moved laterally towards the base of the prism, it recovers its previous brightness, proving that the rays in question have been deviated in the same sense as rays of light.

Refraction being thus proved, I at once sought to concentrate the rays by means of a quartz lens. The experiment is unattended with difficulty. An image of the anticathode is obtained, extremely well-defined as to size and distance by a heightened glow of the small spark.

The existence of refraction rendered that of regular reflection extremely probable; as a matter of fact, regular reflection does take place. By means of a quartz lens, or a lens formed by a very thin horn envelope filled with turpentine, I produce a conjugate focus of the anticathode; then I intercept the emerging pencil by a sheet of polished glass, placed obliquely; I then obtain a focus exactly symmetrical, in respect to the plane of reflection, with the one which existed before the glass was interposed. With a plate of ground glass there is no regular reflection, but diffusion is observed.

If one half of a lamina of mica is roughened, the polished half lets pass the radiations, and the other half stops them (note 3).

This allows of the repetition of the refraction experiments under much more precise conditions, by the use of Newton's arrangement for obtaining a pure spectrum.

From all that precedes, the fact results that the rays which I have thus studied are not Röntgen rays, since these undergo neither refraction nor reflection. In fact, the little spark reveals a new species of radiations emitted by the focus tube, which traverse aluminium, black paper, wood, etc. These are plane-polarized from the moment of their emission, are susceptible of rotatory and elliptic polarization, are refracted, reflected, diffused, but produce neither fluorescence nor photographic action.

I had expected to find that amongst these rays some existed whose refractive index for quartz is about 2; but probably quite a spectrum of such rays exists, for in the refraction experiments with a prism, the deviated pencil appears to cover a broad angle. The study of this dispersion remains to be pursued, as well as that of the wave-lengths of the rays.

By progressively diminishing the intensity of the current actuating the induction-coil, one still gets these new rays, even when the tube no longer produces any fluorescence, and is itself absolutely invisible in the dark. They are fainter, however, in this case. They can also be produced continuously by means of an electric machine giving a spark a few millimetres in length.

At first I had attributed to Röntgen rays the polarization which in reality belongs to the new rays, a confusion which it was impossible to avoid before having observed the refraction, and it was only after making this observation that I could with certainty conclude that I was not dealing with Röntgen rays, but with a new species of light.

It is interesting to collate these remarks with the view expressed by M. Henri Becquerel, that in certain of his experiments "manifestations identical with those giving refraction and total reflection of light may have been produced by luminous rays which had traversed aluminium" (see Comptes Rendus, t. xxxii., March 25, 1901, p. 739).





On the Existence, in the Rays emitted by an Auer Burner, of Radiations which traverse metals, wood, etc. (May 11, 1903).



A focus tube emits, as I have already proved (see p. 7), certain radiations susceptible of traversing metals, black paper, wood, etc. Amongst these, there are some for which the index of refraction of quartz is nearly 2. On the other hand, the index of quartz for the rays remaining from rock-salt, discovered by Professor Rubens, is 2.18. This similarity of indices led me to think that the radiations observed in the emission of a focus tube would very likely be near neighbours of the rays discovered by Rubens, and that, consequently, they would be met with in the radiation emitted by an Auer burner, which is the source of such rays. I accordingly made the following experiment : an Auer burner is enclosed in a kind of lantern of sheet-iron, completely enclosed on all sides, with the exception of openings for the passage of air and combustion gases, which are so arranged that no light escapes; a rectangular orifice, 4 cms. wide and 6.5 cms. high, cut in the iron at the same height as the incandescent mantle, is closed by a sheet of aluminium 1 mm. thick. The chimney of the Auer burner is of sheet-iron, and a slit 2 mms. wide and 3.5 cms. high is cut in it, opposite the mantle, so that the emerging luminous pencil is directed on the aluminium sheet. Outside the lantern, and in front of this sheet, a double-convex quartz lens is placed, having 12 cms. focal length for yellow light, behind which is a spark-gap of the kind already described, giving very small sparks. The spark is produced by a small induction-coil, provided with a rotating make and break device, which works with perfect regularity.

The distance p of the lens from the slit being 26.5 cms., one notes, by help of the spark, the existence of a focus of very great sharpness at a distance, p', of about 13.9 cms. For at this point the spark exhibits a notably greater glow than at the neighbouring points, whether in front or behind, above or below, to the right or to the left. The distance of this focus from the lens can be determined within 3 or 4 mms. The interposition of a sheet of lead or glass 4 mms. thick causes this action to disappear. By varying the value of p, other values of p' are obtained, and substituting these values in the lens formula, the number 2.93 is obtained for the refractive index, being the mean value derived from a series of determinations as concordant as the precision of such observations could entitle one to expect. Similar experiments, made with another quartz lens, having a focal length of 33 cms. for yellow light, gave for the index the value 2.942.

While pursuing these experiments, I ascertained the existence of three other species of radiations, for which the index of quartz has values 2.62, 2.436, 2.29 respectively. These indices are all greater than 2, which explains the following fact: if in the path of the rays emerging from the lens a quartz prism of 30° refractive angle is placed, in such a way as to receive these rays in a direction sensibly normal to one of the refracting faces, no refracted pencil is obtained.

The radiations from an Auer burner, transmitted through an aluminium sheet, are reflected by a polished plate of glass in conformity with the laws of regular reflection, and are diffused by a plate of ground glass.

These radiations traverse all the substances whose transparency I tested, with the exception of rock-salt 3 mms. thick (note 4), platinum 4 mms. thick, and water. A slip of cigarette paper, which is completely transparent when dry, becomes absolutely opaque when wetted with water. Figs. 2 and 3 are reproductions of the impression made in four seconds on a sensitive plate, without any photographic apparatus, before and after wetting the sheet of paper interposed between the lens and the spark. The photo-engraving, produced from a paper print, shows that in the first case the spark is notably brighter.

These photographic prints are produced by the spark influenced by the rays, and not by the rays themselves, these latter producing no appreciable photographic effect after an hour's exposure.

Amongst the bodies which are traversed, I

may mention tinfoil, sheets of copper and brass 0.2 mm. thick, a sheet of aluminium 0.4 mm. thick, a steel lamina 0.05 mm. thick, a silver leaf 0.1 mm. thick, a paper booklet, containing twenty-one gold leaves, a glass sheet, 0.1 mm. thick, a sheet of mica of 0.15 mm., a plate of Iceland spar of 0.4 mm., a block of paraffin of 1 cm., a beech board 1 cm., a plate of ebonite of 1 mm., etc. Fluor spar is but slightly transparent with a thickness of 5 mms., similarly sulphur 2 mms. thick, and glass 1 mm. thick. These results I only give as a first indication, for when they were obtained, the co-existence of four different species of radiations, which may have very different properties, was not taken into account (note 5). It will be highly interesting to investigate whether other sources, and in particular the sun, do not emit analogous radiations to those we are dealing with in the present communication, and also whether the latter produces any calorific action (note 6).

Now, ought these radiations in reality to be considered as akin to the large wave-length radiations discovered by Professor Rubens? Their common origin in the emission of an Auer burner is favourable to such a view, as is also the opacity of rock-salt and of water. But on the other hand, for Auer rays, the transparency of metals and other substances opaque to Rubens' rays constitute an apparently radical difference between the two sorts of radiations (note 7).





On New Sources of Radiations capable of traversing Metals, Wood, etc., and on New Actions produced by these Radiations (May 25, 1903).



While investigating whether radiations analogous to those whose existence I recorded in the emission from an Auer burner (see p. 13) are not to be met also in other sources of light and heat, I established the following facts: the flame of an annular gas-burner emits such radiations; the chimney, however, should be removed, on account of the absorption of the rays by glass. A Bunsen burner scarcely produces any. A piece of sheet-iron or silver, heated to dull redness by a Bunsen burner, placed behind them, gives off rays at about the same rate as an Auer burner.

A plate of polished silver was arranged so that its plane made an angle of 45° with the horizontal plane. This plate having been heated to cherry-red by a Bunsen burner, its upper face emitted rays analogous to those of an Auer burner. A horizontal pencil of these rays, after traversing two sheets of aluminium of 0.3 mm. total thickness, sheets of black paper, etc., was concentrated by a quartz lens; with the aid of the small spark, the existence of four focal regions was ascertained. I further found that the action on the spark was much more pronounced when the spark was arranged vertically — that is, in the plane of emission — than when it was normal to this plane. The new radiations emitted by the polished plate are therefore polarized, as are the light and heat emitted at the same time. The silver plate having been covered with lampblack, the intensity of emission increased, but the polarization disappeared.



The foregoing leads one to think that the emission of radiations susceptible of traversing metals, etc., is an extremely general phenomenon. First observed in the emission of a focus tube, it was also met in that of ordinary sources of light and heat. For shortness, I will henceforward designate these rays by the name of "N" rays.[1]

I would draw attention to the fact that these "N" rays comprise a very large variety of radiations; for while those which issue from an Auer burner have refractive indices greater than 2, there are others, amongst those emitted by a Crookes' tube, whose index is inferior to 1.52, for if a pencil of these rays is made to impinge on an equilateral quartz prism, parallel to the edges and normal to one of the faces, an emerging pencil is obtained which is very much spread out.

Up to this time the only means of detecting the presence of "N" rays was by their action on a small spark. I asked myself if the spark should in this case be considered as an electric phenomenon, or only as producing incandescence like a small gaseous mass. If this latter supposition were correct, the spark could be replaced by a flame. I then produced a quite small flame of gas at the extremity of a metal tube having a very small orifice. This flame was entirely blue. I ascertained that the flame could be used to reveal the presence of "N" rays just like the spark; for when it receives these rays, it becomes whiter and brighter in just the same way. Its variations in glow allowed of four foci being found in a pencil which had passed through a quartz lens; these foci are the same as those detected with the small spark. The small flame behaves therefore, in regard to "N" rays, just like the spark, save that it does not allow of the observation of polarization phenomena.

In order to study more easily the variations in glow, whether of flame or spark, I examine them through a plate of ground glass, about 25 or 30 mms. distant. In this way one obtains, instead of a very small, brilliant point, a luminous patch of about 2 cms. diameter, of much less luminosity, whose variations can be far better appreciated by the eye.

The action of an incandescent body on a flame, or that of a flame on another flame, is certainly a common phenomenon. If it has remained unnoticed up to the present, it is because the light of the source prevented the observation of the variations in glow of the receiving flame.

Quite recently I observed another effect of the "N" rays. It is true that these rays are unable to excite phosphorescence in bodies which can acquire this property under the action of light, but when such a body—calcium sulphide, for instance—has previously been rendered phosphorescent by exposure to sunlight, if it is then exposed to "N" rays—for instance, to one of the foci produced by a quartz lens—the phosphorescent glow is observed to increase in a very marked fashion; neither the production nor the cessation of this effect appear to be absolutely instantaneous. Of all the actions producing "N" rays, this is the one which is most easily observed. The experiment is an easy one to set up and to repeat. This property of "N" rays is analogous to that of the red and infra-red rays discovered by Edmond Becquerel. It is also analogous to the action of heat on phosphorescence. Nevertheless, I have not noticed as yet an increased rate of exhaustion of the phosphorescent capacity under the action of "N" rays (see p. 74).

The kinship of "N" rays with known radiations of large wave-length seems a certain fact. As, on the other hand, the property possessed by these rays of traversing metals differentiates them from all known radiations, it is very probable that they are comprised in the five octaves of the series of radiations, hitherto unexplored, between the Rubens rays and electro-magnetic oscillations of very small wave-length. This is what I propose to verify (note 8).



↑ From the name of the town of Nancy, these researches having been made at the Nancy University. In conformity with a usage which has become established, I now employ the letter "N" instead of "n," which I had at first adopted.





* * *





On the Existence of Solar Radiations capable of traversing Metals, Wood, etc. (June 15, 1903).



I have recently proved that the majority of artificial sources of light and heat emit radiations which are able to traverse metals and a great number of bodies, opaque in regard to the spectral radiations hitherto known (see p. 18). It was desirable to ascertain whether radiations analogous to the former—which, for brevity, I call "N" rays—are also emitted by the sun.

As I have shown, "N" rays act on phosphorescent substances by heightening or stimulating the pre-existing phosphorescence, an action similar to that of red and infra-red rays discovered by Edmond Becquerel (see p. 74). I utilized this phenomenon to find out whether the sun sends us "N" rays.

A completely enclosed dark room has one window exposed to the sun. This is shut by interior, opaque panels of oak, 15 mms. thick. Behind one of these panels, at any distance—1 metre, for instance—a thin glass tube is placed, containing a phosphorescent substance, say calcium sulphide, which has been previously exposed for a short time to solar rays. If, now, on the path of the solar rays, which are supposed to reach the tube through the wood, a sheet of lead, or the hand simply, is interposed, even at a great distance from the tube, the phosphorescent glow is seen to diminish; when the obstacle is removed, the glow reappears. The extreme simplicity of this experiment will incite many persons, I hope, to repeat it. The only precaution one need take is to operate with a feeble preliminary phosphorescence (note 9). It is advantageous to arrange permanently a sheet of black paper, so that the interposition of the screen does not change the background on which the tube stands out. The variations in glow are especially easy to catch near the contours of the luminous patch formed by the phosphorescent body on the dark background; when the "N" rays are intercepted, these contours lose their sharpness, regaining the same when the screen is removed. However, these variations in glow do not appear to be instantaneous. Interposing between the shutter and the tube several sheets of aluminium, cardboard, or an oak board 3 cms. thick, does not hinder the phenomenon; any possibility of an action of radiated heat, as such, is consequently excluded. A thin film of water completely arrests the rays; light clouds passing over the sun considerably diminish their action.

The "N" rays emitted by the sun can be concentrated by a quartz lens; by means of the phosphorescent substance, the existence of several foci is ascertained. I have not yet determined their positions with sufficient precision to speak of them here. The "N" rays of sunlight undergo regular reflection by a polished plate of glass, and are diffused by ground glass.

The "N" rays issuing from the sun increase the glow of a small spark and a small flame in the same manner as those emitted by a Crookes' tube, by a flame, or by an incandescent body. These phenomena are easy to observe, especially if use is made of an interposed sheet of ground glass, as indicated by me in a preceding communication. The use of a small flame is by far the most convenient and precise of all processes for determining the position of the foci. Operating with the small spark is much harder, because the spark is rarely very regular.

I feel bound to reproduce, textually, here a passage in a letter which M. Gustave le Bon has done me the honour of writing—

"M. Gustave le Bon had indicated, as far back as seven years ago, that flames emit, independently of the radio-active emanations since observed by him, radiations of large wave-length, capable of traversing metals, and to which he had given the name of black light; but while assigning these a place intermediate between light and electricity, he had not exactly measured their wave-length, and the method he had employed to reveal their presence was very uncertain."

The method referred to was the photographic method. Personally, I have not been able to obtain any photographic effect of the rays I have studied (see p. 16).





On a New Action produced by "N" rays, and on Several Facts connected with these Radiations (July 20, 1903).



The action of "N" rays on a small flame gave me the idea of trying whether they did not exercise an analogous action on a solid incandescent body. For this purpose a platinum wire, about 0.1 mm. diameter and 15 mms. long, was heated to dull redness by an electric current. A pencil of "N" rays, emitted by an Auer burner, was directed through wood and aluminium screens on this wire, and was concentrated by a quartz lens.

The wire was observed through a plate of ground glass, fixed to the same support as the wire itself, and about 3 cms. in front of it. On displacing the wire, several foci were found, just as with other processes employed to detect "N" rays. The wire being placed at one of these foci, the luminous patch on the ground glass is seen to diminish in brightness when a lead screen, or merely the hand, is interposed; when the obstacle is removed, the light resumes its former brightness. These actions do not appear instantaneous.

I have generalized the former experiments by employing, instead of a wire heated by an electric current, a sheet of platinum 0.1 mm. thick, inclined at 45° on the horizontal plane, partially heated to a dark red by a small gas flame placed underneath. A horizontal pencil of "N" rays, concentrated by a lens, was made to impinge on the under face of the sheet, so as to produce a focus at the heated spot; on the upper face the incandescent patch was observed without interposing ground glass. The variations in brightness are exactly analogous to those of the wire. When observing, through ground glass, the intensity of illumination of the bottom face of the sheet, due to the rays and the flame together, quite similar variations are found. Further, the same results are obtained if, instead of making the rays fall on the lower face, or the side on which the flame acts directly, they are directed upon the upper face.

The different effects produced by "N" rays, viz. their action on a spark or flame, and on phosphorescent or incandescent bodies, would lead to the supposition that they might also have a heating effect on the bodies subjected to their action. To test the matter experimentally, I installed a thermopile of Rubens' connected to an enclosed galvanometer. The action of "N" rays on this apparatus was absolutely nil, even in the most favorable conditions, though a candle placed 12 metres away from the thermopile gave a deflection of about 0.5 mm. on the scale. I conducted the experiment not only with "N" rays proceeding from an Auer burner, but also with those from the sun on the 3rd of July, 1904, at midday. The rays were very intense, for when I placed in front of the thermopile a tube containing calcium sulphide, which had been feebly excited by exposure to the sun, its glow was greatly increased, but was diminished by the interposition of a lead screen or the hand. M. H. Rubens made the same observation, as he was kind enough to write me, his apparatus being much more sensitive even than mine. I nevertheless thought it useful to determine directly whether the incandescent platinum wire was not heated by the action of "N" rays. To this end, I had recourse to the study of its electric resistance. The current flowing through the wire is produced by five accumulators; with the aid of high-resistance rheostats, the intensity is adjusted to make the platinum wire a dull red. The wire is stretched between two massive brass pliers, A and B, which are connected to the terminals of a capillary electrometer; on one of the connecting wires an adjustable electromotive force is inserted, obtained by shunting a portion of the circuit of an auxiliary battery. This electromotive force is regulated so that the electrometer is at zero. Every variation in resistance of the platinum wire produces a deviation of the electrometer. Now, with "N" rays playing on the wire, no deviation of the meniscus was observed. The interposition of a lead or wet-paper screen remained without effect on the electrometer, though the wire underwent the usual variations in brightness. This certainly proves that "N" rays do not raise its temperature. I, moreover, assured myself that the method was sufficiently sensitive by the following experiments; by means of a wire rheostat, an assistant varied the resistance of a circuit containing the platinum wire and the accumulators, and consequently the strength of the current, but not sufficiently for the observer to perceive a variation in the glow of the wire. In spite of this, the electrometer was deflected three divisions of the micrometer in the eye-piece. The following is another verification: raising the temperature of the wire one degree would alter its resistance in the ratio of about 1.004 to one; the difference of potential between A and B would alter in about the same ratio, since, the resistance external to the wire being very great, the current strength does not change. In my experiments this variation would deflect the electrometer by fifteen divisions. As absolutely no deviation occurred, and as, moreover, a quarter of a division could have been easily observed, the rise in temperature is certainly very inferior to of a degree, and, consequently, quite insufficient to produce the observed increase in glow. It is thus super-abundantly established that the increase in glow produced by the rays is not due to a rise in temperature.

In the experiments with a plate of platinum, mentioned above, the increase in glow was apparent on the two faces of the sheet. Given that there is no rise in temperature, this seems paradoxical; for since "N" rays do not go through platinum, it seemed as if the action should only appear on the side exposed to these rays. To reconcile these results, it was necessary to suppose that "N" rays, which do not traverse cold platinum, traverse it when incandescent. I then reverted to the apparatus which was destined to show the action of "N" rays on a small flame, and behind the quartz lens I arranged a platinum sheet larger than the lens. The interposition of a lead screen between the platinum and the source produced no effect on the small flame, which verifies the opacity of platinum. The plate being then heated to redness, interposing the screen was seen to diminish the glow of the small flame. "N" rays issuing from an Auer burner traverse therefore incandescent platinum.





On New Actions produced by "N" rays—Generalization of the Phenomena already observed (November 2, 1903).



When a pencil of "N" rays is directed either on a small spark, flame, or a phosphorescent substance previously exposed to the sun's rays, or, again, to a platinum plate heated to dull redness, the light emitted by these various sources is seen to increase in glow. In these experiments, one operates on sources emitting light spontaneously. I asked myself whether one could not generalize these experiments by using a body not emitting light itself, but reflecting that which reaches it from an external source. I consequently carried out the following experiment: a slip of white paper, 15 mms. long and 2 mms. broad, is fixed vertically to a wire holder; the room being made dark, the slip is dimly lighted by projecting laterally on it a pencil of light, emitted by a small flame shut up in a box, in which a vertical slit is pierced.

On the other hand, the rays are produced by the following contrivance: an Auer burner, provided with a sheet-iron chimney, in which a rectangular orifice, 60 mms. high and 25 mms. broad, has been cut, is enclosed in an iron lantern pierced with an opening placed in front of the chimney orifice, and stopped up by a plate of aluminium. In front of this window the small slip of paper is placed, illuminated in the manner indicated above. If, now, the rays are intercepted by interposing a sheet of lead or the hand, the small paper rectangle is seen to darken, and its contours to lose their sharpness; the light diffused by the slip of paper is thus increased by the action of "N" rays.

The following idea then presented itself: the diffusion of light is a complex phenomenon, in which the elementary fact is regular reflection, and consequently there is reason for ascertaining experimentally whether the reflection of light is, or is not, modified by the action of "N" rays. For this purpose, a polished steel knitting-needle was fixed vertically in place of the slip of paper of the former experiment; at the same time, in a box completely closed, with the exception of a vertical slit cut at the same height as the Auer burner, and stopped up by transparent paper, a flame was disposed so as to light up the slit. By suitably placing the eye and the slit, the image of this latter is seen formed by reflection on the steel cylinder, and simultaneously the reflecting surface is receiving the "N" rays. It was then easy to observe that the action of these rays reinforces the image, for if they are intercepted, the image darkens, and turns to a reddish hue. I repeated this experiment with the same success by employing, instead of the knitting-needle, a plane mirror of bronze.

The same result is again obtained by reflecting the light on the polished face of a block of quartz. However, when the "N" rays fall normally on the refracting face, their action on reflected light disappears, whatever be the incidence of this light, whether it be that their action becomes zero, or simply inappreciable. In order that the light reflected by the quartz may be reinforced by the "N" rays, it is not necessary that the rays should be directed towards the interior of the quartz; the action still occurs when the "N" rays traverse the reflecting surface from the inside towards the outside.

All these actions of "N" rays on light require an appreciable time-interval for appearing and disappearing. I was unable, although I varied the experiment in a great many ways, to observe any action of "N" rays on the refracted light.

I will here make the following general remark concerning the observation of "N" rays. The aptitude for catching small variations in luminous intensity is very different in different persons; some see from the outset, and without any difficulty, the reinforcing action produced by "N" rays on the brightness of a small luminous source; for others, these phenomena lie almost at the limit of what they are able to discern, and it is only after a certain amount of practice that they succeed in catching them easily, and in observing them with complete certainty. The smallness of the effects and the delicacy of their observation must not deter us from a study which puts us in possession of radiations hitherto unknown. I have recently observed that the Auer burner can be advantageously replaced by the Nernst lamp, without a glass, this lamp giving more intense "N" rays. With a 200-watt lamp, the phenomena are marked enough to be, in my belief, easily visible to any one at the first trial.





On the Storing-up of "N" rays by Certain Bodies (November 9, 1903).



In the course of my researches on "N" rays, I had occasion to note a very remarkable fact. The "N" rays were produced by an Auer burner enclosed in a lantern, and after passing through one of the sides of the lantern, formed by a sheet of aluminium, were concentrated by a quartz lens upon phosphorescent calcium sulphide.[1] The Auer burner having been extinguished and removed the phosphorescent glow, to my great surprise, remained almost as strong as ever, but was darkened by the interposition of lead, or wet paper, or the hand, between the lantern and the sulphide. Nothing was altered by the suppression of the Auer burner, except that the observed actions grew progressively weaker. At the end of twenty minutes they still existed, but were scarcely noticeable.

Studying closely the circumstances of the phenomenon, I was not long in recognizing that the quartz lens had itself become a source of "N" rays; for when this was removed, all action on the sulphide ceased, whereas if it was brought nearer the sulphide, even laterally, the latter would become more luminous. I then took a quartz plate 15 mms. thick, whose surface formed a square of 5-cm. sides, and exposed this to the "N" rays emitted by an Auer burner through two sheets of aluminium and some black paper. It became as active as the lens; when brought nearer the sulphide, it seemed, according to Bichat's expression, as if a veil darkening it was being removed. A still more marked effect was obtained by interposing the quartz plate between the source and the sulphide, quite close to the latter.

In these experiments, the secondary emission by the quartz is added to the "N" rays directly emanating from the source. This secondary emission has, indeed, its origin in the whole mass of the quartz, and not at the surface only, for if several plates of quartz be successively placed on top of each other, the effect is seen to increase with each added plate. Iceland spar, fluor spar, barite, glass, etc., behave like quartz. The filament of a Nernst lamp remains active for several hours after the lamp is extinguished.

A piece of gold, laterally brought near to the sulphide while it is being subjected to "N" rays, increases its glow (note 10); lead, platinum, silver, zinc, etc., produce the same effects. These actions persist after the extinction of "N" rays, as in the case of quartz. Nevertheless, the property of secondary ray emission only permeates slowly through a metallic mass. Thus, if one of the faces of a sheet of lead 2 mms. thick has been exposed to "N" rays for several minutes, this face alone shows activity; an exposure of several hours is necessary for the activity to reach the opposite face.

Aluminium, wood, dry or wet paper, and paraffin do not enjoy the property of storing "N" rays. Calcium sulphide, on the other hand, does possess this property. When I put a few grams of sulphide in an envelope, and then exposed the envelope to "N" rays, I found that its proximity was sufficient to reinforce the phosphorescence of a small mass of previously excited sulphide. This property explains a constant peculiarity that I have previously set forth, viz. that the increase of phosphorescence under the action of "N" rays takes an appreciable time whether to appear or to disappear. For, thanks to the storing-up of the "N" rays, the different parts of a mass of sulphide mutually reinforce their phosphorescence; but since, on the one hand, this reinforcing is progressive, as I have directly proved, and since, on the other hand, the stored-up provision is not immediately exhausted, the result is that when "N" rays are made to fall on phosphorescent calcium sulphide, their effect must increase slowly, and that when they are suppressed, their effect can only disappear slowly.[2]

Pebbles picked up at about four o'clock p.m., in a yard where they had been exposed to the sun, spontaneously emitted "N" rays; bringing them near a small mass of phosphorescent sulphide was sufficient to increase its luminosity. Fragments of calcareous stone, brick, etc., picked up in the same yard, produced analogous actions.

The activity of all these bodies still persisted after four days, without any sensible diminution. It is, however, necessary for the manifestation of such actions that the surface of these bodies should be quite dry; for we know that the thinnest layer of moisture is sufficient to arrest "N" rays. Vegetable earth was found to be inactive, doubtless on account of its moisture; pebbles taken from several centimetres underneath the surface of the soil were inactive, even after being dried.



The phenomena of the storing-up of "N" rays, which are the object of the present note, ought naturally to be compared with those of phosphorescence; yet they present a quite distinct feature, as I intend to show shortly.



↑ This sulphide was tightly packed into a slit cut into a sheet of cardboard 0.8 mm. thick; the width of the slit was 0.5 nd its length 15 mm. After exposure to sunlight, a small, luminous source is thus obtained, which is very sensitive to "N" rays.

↑ I repeat here that, as a rule, when experimenting with "N" rays, it is advantageous to replace the Auer burner by a Nernst lamp absorbing about 200 watts.





* * *





On the Strengthening Action of a Beam of Light on the Eyes, when the Beam is accompanied by "N" Rays (November 23, 1903).



While studying the storing-up of "N" rays by different bodies, I had occasion to observe an unexpected phenomenon. My eyes were fixed on a small slip of paper, dimly lighted, distant about i metre from me; a brick, one of whose faces had been sun-exposed, having been brought near laterally to the luminous pencil, with its sun-exposed face turned towards me, and a few decimetres distant from my eyes, I saw the slip assume a heightened glow; when the brick was removed, or when its non-exposed face was turned towards me, the paper grew darker. To remove all possibility of illusion, I arranged permanently a box closed by a cover and wrapped in black paper; in this completely enclosed box the brick was placed, and, in this manner, the dark background on which the slip stood out remained rigorously invariable, but the observed effect remained the same. The experiment can be varied in different ways. For instance, the laboratory shutters being almost closed, and the dial of the clock fixed to a wall which was just sufficiently lighted for the dial, at a distance of 4 metres, to be just perceived as a grey patch with no defined contour, if the observer, without changing his place, directs towards his eyes the "N" rays emitted by a previously exposed brick or pebble, he sees the dial whiten; he can trace distinctly its circular contour, and even succeed in seeing the hands. When the "N" rays are suppressed, the dial again grows dark. Neither the production nor the cessation of the phenomenon are instantaneous.

As in these experiments the luminous object is placed very far away from the source of "N" rays, and as, on the other hand, in order that the experiment may succeed, the rays must be directed, not towards the object, but towards the eye, there can be no question here of an increase in emission of a luminous body influenced by "N" rays, but indeed of a strengthening of the effect upon the eye, due to the "N" rays which are superposed on the luminous rays.

This fact astonished me all the more because, since the slightest film of water arrests "N" rays, it seemed unlikely that they could penetrate into the eye, whose humours contain more than 98.6 per cent. of water (Lohmeyer). The small quantity of salt contained in these humours must have rendered them transparent to "N" rays. But, then, in all probability, salt water must itself be transparent. Experiment shows that this is the case, for while a sheet of wet paper completely arrests "N" rays, a vase of Bohemian glass, 4 cms. in diameter, filled with salt water and placed in their path, lets them pass without sensible weakening. A very small quantity of sodium chloride is sufficient to render water transparent. What is more, salt water is capable of storing-up "N" rays, and in the above-described experiments the brick can be replaced by a vase of thin glass, filled with salt water, and previously exposed to the sun's rays; the effect is very marked. It is certainly due to the salt water, for the empty vase is without effect. This is a unique example of a phosphorescence phenomenon in a liquid body. It is true that the wave-lengths of "N" rays are very different from those of luminous rays, as results from measurements which it is my intention to describe very soon.

The eye of an ox, killed the day before, rid of its muscles and the tissues adhering to the sclerotic, proved to be transparent to "N" rays in all directions, and became itself active by sun-exposure; it is the storing-up of the "N" rays by the media of the eye which causes the retardation observed in the appearance and cessation of the phenomena which are the subject of the present note.

Sea-water and the stones exposed to solar radiation store up "N" rays which they afterwards restore. Possibly these phenomena play some hitherto unperceived part in certain terrestrial phenomena. Perhaps, also, "N" rays are not without influence on certain phenomena of animal and vegetable life.

The following are further observations concerning the strengthening action of "N" rays on luminous rays.

It is sufficient for the production of the phenomenon that the "N" rays reach the eye, no matter how, even laterally. This seems to indicate that the observer's eye behaves like an accumulator of "N" rays, and that it is these rays accumulated in the media of the eye which act on the retina, jointly with luminous rays.

It matters little whether in these experiments the rays are emitted by a body previously exposed to the sun, or are primary rays, produced for instance by a Nernst lamp.

Sodium hyposulphite, whether solid or dissolved in water, constitutes a powerful accumulator of "N" rays.





On the Property of emitting "N" Rays, which is conferred on Certain Bodies by Compression, and on the Spontaneous and Indefinite Emission of "N" Rays by Hardened Steel, unannealed Glass, and other Bodies in a State of Strained Molecular Equilibrium (December 7, 1903).



Professor A. Charpentier kindly undertook to keep me informed with regard to the progress of certain researches of a physiological nature which he is conducting in connection with "N" rays, unpublished researches which (note 11) promise highly interesting results. These experiments led me to the idea of examining whether certain bodies did not acquire, by compression, the property of emitting "N" rays. For this purpose I compressed, by means of a carpenter's press, bits of wood, glass, rubber, etc., and I immediately observed that these bodies had in fact become, during the compression, sources of "N" rays; brought near a mass of phosphorescent calcium sulphide, they increased its luminosity; and they can also be used for repeating the experiments which show the strengthening of the action on the retina by light when "N" rays are acting simultaneously on the eye.

These last experiments may be made in a very simple manner. The shutters of a room should be closed so as to leave just enough light for a white surface standing out on a dark background—for instance, the dial of a clock—to appear, before an observer 4 or 5 metres distant, like a grey patch with ill-defined contours. If a cane stick placed before the eyes is bent, the grey surface is seen to whiten; if the cane is allowed to straighten, the surface grows dark again. Instead of the cane, a slip of plate-glass can be used. This is bent either with the press employed in lectures for showing the doubly refractive property of glass acquired by flexure, or simply with the hands. With a suitable amount of light, which may be obtained after a few trials, these phenomena are easily visible. They are not instantaneous, as I have already explained. It is of the utmost importance that this retardation be taken into account when one wishes to study these phenomena; to this may doubtless be ascribed the fact that they have remained so long undetected.

I was then led to ask myself whether bodies which are themselves in a state of strained internal equilibrium would not emit "N" rays. That they do so is indeed confirmed by experiment. Rupert's drops, hardened steel, hammer-hardened brass, melted sulphur of crystalline structure, etc., are spontaneous and permanent sources of "N" rays. One can, for instance, repeat the experiments with the clock dial, employing, instead of a compressed body, a hardened steel tool, such as a chisel or file, or even a pocket-knife, without in any way bending or compressing them; similarly, bringing near to a small mass of phosphorescent calcium sulphide a knife-blade or bit of unannealed glass is sufficient to increase the phosphorescence. Non-hardened steel is without action; a chisel which is successively hardened and softened in turn is active when hard and inactive when the temper is taken out of it. These actions traverse, without any notable weakening, a plate of aluminium 1.5 cm. thick, an oak board 3 cms. thick, black paper, etc.



The emission of "N" rays by tempered steel seems to last indefinitely. Some lathe-tools and a stamp for leather of the 18th century, which have been preserved in my family, and have certainly not been rehardened since the date of their manufacture, emit "N" rays like freshly tempered steel. A knife, found in a Gallo-Roman tomb, situated in the district of Craincourt (Lorraine), and dating from the Merovingian epoch, as is attested by the objects found there (glass and earthenware jars, fibulae, belt-buckles, swords of the kind called scramasax, etc.), emits "N" rays just like a modern knife. These rays originate exclusively from the blade; a test with a file showed that the blade alone is tempered, and that the tailpiece intended to be fixed in a handle is not tempered.[1]

The emission of "N" rays by this steel blade has thus persisted for more than twelve centuries, and does not appear to have abated.



The spontaneity and the indefinite duration of the emission by steel suggests the idea of assimilating it to the radiant properties of uranium, discovered by M. H. Becquerel, properties which the bodies since discovered by M. and Mme. Curie, viz. radium, polonium, etc., exhibit with so much intensity. Nevertheless, "N" rays are certainly spectrum radiations; they are emitted by the same sources as spectrum radiations; they are reflected and polarized, and possess well-defined wave-lengths, which I have measured. The energy which their emission represents is most likely borrowed from the potential energy corresponding to the strained state of tempered steel; this expenditure is doubtless very slight, since the effects of the "N" rays are likewise slight, which explains the apparently unlimited duration of the emission.

An iron plate, bent so as to impress on it a permanent deformation, emits "N" rays; but the emission ceases after a few minutes. A block of aluminium, fresh-hammered, behaves in an analogous manner; but the time of emission is even shorter. In these two cases the state of molecular strain is transitory, as is also the emission of "N" rays.

Torsion produces effects analogous to compression.



↑ The primitive Gauls do not appear to have known steel, for, from Polybius' account, their iron swords did not stab, and bent in combat at the very first blows. The knife alluded to here is of Gallo-Roman origin, and the Gallo-Romans had doubtless learnt from the Romans the art of making and tempering steel.





* * *





On the Dispersion of "N" Rays and on their Wave-length (January 18, 1904).



To study the dispersion and the wave-lengths of "N" rays, I used methods quite similar to those employed for light. In order to avoid complications which might have resulted from the storing-up of "N" rays, I used exclusively prisms and lenses of aluminium, a substance which does not absorb their rays.

The following is the method employed to study dispersion. The rays are produced by a Nernst lamp, enclosed in a lantern of sheet-iron, pierced with an opening, which is shut by aluminium foil; the rays from the lamp which pass through this opening are sifted by a deal board 2 cms. thick, a second sheet of aluminium, and two leaves of black paper, so as to eliminate radiations foreign to "N" rays. In front of those screens, and at a distance of 14 cms. from the lamp filament, a large screen of wet cardboard is arranged, in which a slit has been cut 5 mms. wide and 3.5 cms. high, exactly opposite the lamp filament. In this way I obtain a well-defined pencil of "N" rays; this pencil is received on an aluminium prism whose refractive angle is 27° 15′, placed so that one of its faces is normal to the incident pencil.

It is, then, possible to prove that from the other refractive face of the prism several pencils of "N" rays, horizontally dispersed, emerge. For this purpose a slit 1 mm. broad and 1 cm. high, cut in a sheet of cardboard, is filled with calcium sulphide rendered phosphorescent; by displacing this slit, the position of the dispersed pencils is determined without difficulty, and the deviations being known, their refractive indices are deduced. This is the method of Descartes. I thus established the existence of "N" radiations, whose indices are respectively 1.04, 1.19, 1.29, 1.36, 1.40, 1.48, 1.68, 1.85. In order to measure with more exactness the first two indices, I made use of another aluminium prism having an angle of 60°. I again found for one of the indices the same value, 1.04; and for the other, 1.15 instead of 1.19.

In order to control the results obtained by the prisms, I determined the indices by producing, by means of an aluminium lens, images of the lamp filament, and measuring their distances from the lens. The lens, which is plano-convex, has a radius of curvature of 6.63 cms., and an aperture of 6.8 cms. The slit of the wet screen is widened so as to form a circular opening 6 cms. in diameter; the lens is placed at a known distance ( cm.) from the incandescent filament, and by means of the phosphorescent sulphide, the position of the conjugate images of the filament is determined. The following table gives the values of the indices found, both with the prism and the lens:—

Prisms. Lens.



27° 15′ 60°

1.85 „ ... ... 1.86 1.91 1.91

1.68 „ ... ... 1.67 1.66 1.67

1.48 „ ... ... 1.50 1.44 1.48

1.40 „ ... ... 1.42 1.42 1.43

1.36 „ ... ... 1.36 1.36 1.37

1.29 „ ... ... 1.36 1.31 „

1.19 1.15 ... ... 1.20 „ „

1.04 1.04 ... ... „ „ „



Here is another verification of these results: if for the fourth index the mean value 1.42 is adopted, one works out that for an aluminium prism of 60°, the incidence giving the minimum deviation is 45° 19′, and that this deviation is 30° 38′; the observed deviation was 31° 10′. With the same incidence, the calculated deviation of the radiation, whose index is 1.67, is 57° 42′; the observed deviation was 56° 30′.

I now pass on to the determination of wave-lengths.

By means of the above-described arrangement for studying dispersion by the prism of 27° 15′, refracted pencils are obtained, each of which is sensibly homogeneous. If we make the pencil we wish to study impinge on a second screen of wet cardboard, pierced with a slit 1.5 mm. wide, we can isolate a narrow portion of this pencil.

On the other hand, a piece of aluminium foil is fixed to the moving radial arm of a goniometer, so that its plane is normal to the arm; in this foil a slit is cut only 0.07 mm. wide, and filled with phosphorescent calcium sulphide; the goniometer is arranged so that its axis is exactly underneath the slit of the second wet cardboard. By turning the arm, the path of the pencil is exactly marked out, and one can verify that it is quite unique, and is accompanied by no lateral pencil, such as diffraction could eventually produce in the case of large wave-lengths.

A grating is then placed in front of the slit of the second wet cardboard (for instance, a Brunner grating of 200 lines per mm.). If, now, the emerging pencil is explored by turning the arm which bears the phosphorescent sulphide, the existence of a system of diffraction fringes is confirmed, just as with light, only these fringes are much closer together, and are sensibly equidistant. This already indicates that "N" rays have much shorter wave-lengths than luminous radiations.

The angular distance of the fringes, or what amounts to the same thing, the rotation of the arm corresponding to the passage of the phosphorescent slit from one luminous fringe to the next, is very small. It is therefore determined by the method of reflection, with the aid of a divided scale and telescope, a plane-mirror being fixed to the arm. Moreover, one measures, not the distance between two consecutive fringes, but that between two symmetrical fringes of a high order—for example, that between the tenth fringe on the right, and the tenth fringe on the left. From these measures of angle, and from the number of lines per millimetre of the grating, the wave-length can be deduced by the known formula.

Each wave-length has been determined by three series of measures, effected with three gratings, having respectively 200, 100, and 50 lines per millimetre.

The following table exhibits the results of these measures:—

Wave-lengths.



Grating employed.

Probable values

deduced from

the preceding.

Indices. 200 lines

per mm. 100 lines

per mm. 50 lines

per mm.

1 ·04 0 ·00813 0 ·00795 0 ·00839 0 ·00815

1 ·19 0 ·0093 0 ·0102 0 ·0106 0 ·0099

1 ·4 0 ·0117 — — 0 ·0117

1 ·68 0 ·0146 — — 0 ·0146

1 ·85 0 ·0176 0 ·0171 0 ·0184 0 ·0176

Being desirous of controlling these determinations by the use of a quite different method, I had recourse to Newton's rings. These being produced, in yellow light, for instance, if one passes from one dark ring to the following, the variation of optical retardation in air is one wave-length of yellow light. If, now, with the same apparatus and the same incidence, rings are produced by means of "N" rays, and the number of these rings comprised between two dark rings in yellow light is counted, we shall obtain the number of times which the wave-length of "N" rays is contained in the wave-length of yellow light. This method, applied to rays of index 1.04, gave the values 0.0085 instead of 0.0081 found by the gratings; and for the index 1.85, the value 0.017 instead of 0.0176. Though the ring method is inferior to the grating method, on account of the uncertainty attending the exact position of the dark rings in the experiment, an uncertainty which is due to the necessity of rendering these rings very wide, the concordance of the numbers obtained by the two methods constitutes a valuable control.

In the tables given above I have retained all the decimals occurring in the calculation of the numbers deduced from observation. Although I cannot with certainty indicate the degree of approximation of the results, I believe, nevertheless, that the relative errors do not exceed 4 per cent.

The wave-lengths of "N" rays are much smaller than those of light. This is contrary to what I had imagined for a moment, and contrary to the determinations which M. Sagnac thought he had deduced from the position of the multiple images of a source, obtained with a quartz lens, images attributed by him to diffraction. I had previously observed that while polished mica lets "N" rays pass, roughened mica stops them, and also that whereas polished glass reflects them regularly, ground glass diffuses them. These facts were already an indication that "N" rays could not have large wave-lengths. If we desire to study the transparency of a body, we must take care that the surface is well polished. Thus I had at first classed rock-salt amongst opaque substances, because the specimen I used, having been sawn from a large block, had remained unpolished; in reality, rock-salt is transparent. The radiations of very small wave-length, discovered by M. Schumann, are to a very great extent absorbed by air; "N" rays are not. This implies the existence of absorption bands between the ultra-violet spectrum and "N" rays. The wave-length of "N" rays increases with their refractive index, contrary to what occurs with luminous radiations.

If the increase in brilliancy of a small luminous source by the action of "N" rays is to be attributed to a transformation of these radiations into luminous radiations, this transformation is in conformity with Stokes' law.





Registration by Photography of the Action produced by "N" Rays on a small Electric Spark (February 22, 1904).



Though "N" rays have no intrinsic action on the photographic plate, it is nevertheless possible to utilize photography to reveal their presence and study their action. This object is attained, as I showed as long ago as May 11, 1903, by making a small, luminous source act for a determined period on a sensitive plate, whilst this source is subjected to the action of "N" rays, and then repeating the experiment for the same interval of time and under the same conditions, save that the "N" rays are suppressed. The impression produced is notably more intense in the first case than in the second. As an example of the application of this method, I gave at the time two photo-engravings, whose comparison shows that water, even when used in very thin films, arrests "N" rays issuing from an Auer burner (see page 16). Since then I have extended the experiments to the registration of actions produced by "N" rays from various sources, and I have perfected the process, as will be shown.

A small, luminous spark is the most appropriate luminous source for this kind of investigation: for, on the one hand, it is very actinic, and, on the other, it can be maintained as long as necessary at the same intensity. Although it is impossible to obtain absolute steadiness of glow in the spark, since these variations are not produced systematically,

their influence should disappear in the total impression received by the plate, even after a very short exposure. I contrived, besides, to eliminate even still more completely this cause of perturbation, by repeatedly alternating the experiments, as I will proceed to show. Fig. 4 represents a horizontal section of the apparatus employed. AB is the photographic plate, 13 cms. wide; E is the spark enclosed in a cardboard box, FGHI, open only on the side facing the plate, and allowing the spark to act on one half, OB, of the plate only; CD is a lead screen wrapped in wet paper, rigidly connected with the frame which holds the plate. The "N" rays, proceeding from any source, form a pencil, having the direction NN'. With this arrangement the "N" rays are arrested by the screen CD; the spark, while it acts on half-plate OB, is sheltered from the rays.

Now impart to the frame containing the plate a translation to the right equal to half its length (Fig. 5); the other half, AO, of the plate takes the place formerly occupied by OB; and this time the screen CD, carried along with the frame in this movement, is no longer interposed in the path of the rays. The half-plate AO therefore receives the action of the spark while subjected to the rays.

This being understood, the experiment is as follows: first the plate is kept in the first of the above-indicated positions during five seconds, then in the second position also for five seconds; it is then brought back to the first position, and the double operation just described is repeated several times.

After an interval of time equal to an even multiple of five seconds—for instance, one hundred seconds—each of the half-plates has been exposed to the spark for an equal period, only, while AO was exposed, "N" rays were in action, and while OB was exposed there were none.

Thanks to an arrangement of guides and buffer-stops, the to-and-fro motion of the frame can be executed with perfect certainty and regularity, in spite of the darkness. A metronome is used to regulate the action.



The spark is produced by a small induction-coil, known as du Bois-Reymond's chariot apparatus; it strikes between two blunt points of platinum-iridium, carefully machined and polished. These are fixed to the two jaws of a pair of wooden pliers, which tend to close by elasticity, and are kept apart by a micrometer screw. At a distance of about 2 cms. from the spark, and facing the plate, a plate of ground glass is fixed. As I have previously mentioned, the light of the spark produces on this glass an extensive luminous patch, much easier to observe than the naked spark, and giving on the photographic plate impressions of much more regular form. The regulating of the spark is the delicate part of the experiment. The induced current must first be adjusted, by modifying the primary current on the one hand, and the position of the secondary coil on the other, till the spark becomes very small. The points are washed in alcohol, then a slip of dry paper is drawn between them, for the purpose of drying and repolishing their surface; then the micrometer screw is turned so as to make the spark as short as possible, yet without incurring any risk of the points touching by any chance vibration, which would make it disappear intermittently. By a methodical process of trial and error, which sometimes demands much time and patience, one succeeds in getting a spark both regular and very feeble; it is then sensitive to the action of "N" rays. If one directs on it a pencil of these radiations, proceeding from any source, one sees the patch on the ground glass increase in size and glow; at the same time its central part becomes more luminous, appearing wrapped in a kind of nimbus. One can then proceed with the photographic experiment. I made about forty such experiments, employing in turn, as sources of "N" rays, a Nernst lamp, compressed wood, hardened steel, Rupert's drops, etc. I have varied the experiments in different ways—for example, by changing the side of the screen CD, by using a zinc screen transparent to "N" rays, etc. Several eminent physicists, who have been good enough to visit my laboratory, have witnessed them. Of these forty experiments, one was unsuccessful: the rays were produced by a Nernst lamp, and instead of



the expected unequal impressions, two sensibly identical images were obtained. I believe this failure, unique, be it remarked, to be due to an insufficient regulation of the spark, which, doubtless, was not sensitive. Fig. 6 is a photo-engraved reproduction of the prints obtained with and without "N" rays issuing from a Nernst lamp.

Fig. 7, similarly, shows the result of an experiment with "N" rays, produced by two large files.

Though the photogravures are far from rendering in a satisfactory manner the aspect of the originals, they nevertheless show the influence of "N" rays on a photographic impression.

I give further (Figs. 8 and 9) the reproduction of photographs, showing that "N" rays, issuing from a Crooke's tube, are polarized.

These photographs date from the month of April, 1903. They were not obtained by the method of reiterated alternation of exposure, as this method is difficult to apply to this case; but the experiments have been repeated a great number of times with the most minute precautions, and the constancy of the results is an absolute guarantee of their worth.

From my communication of May 11, 1903, and from what precedes, it is clear that, from the beginning of my researches on "N" rays, I had succeeded in recording their action on the spark by an objective method.





On a New Species of "N" Rays (February 29, 1904).



Observations made during a very complex experiment, which I owe to Dr. Th. Guidloz, led me to suspect the existence of a variety of "N" rays, which, instead of increasing, on the contrary, diminished the glow of a feeble luminous source. I undertook to search for rays of this type amongst those emitted by a Nernst lamp. While previously studying the spectrum of this emission, produced by an aluminium prism, I had not met with such radiations. I consequently thought that there were reasons for studying anew, and still more minutely, the feebly deviated part of the spectrum. On

exploring this region, by means of a narrow slit filled with phosphorescent calcium sulphide, I ascertained, without any difficulty, that, in certain azimuths, the glow of the spark diminished under the action of the rays, and increased, on the contrary, when they were intercepted by a wet screen. These were, in fact, the looked-for radiations; I will call them "N1" rays.

Although the aluminium prism of 27° 15′ I used previously is suitable for these experiments, nevertheless, in order to increase the dispersion, I used an aluminium prism of 60°, and afterwards another of 90°. With the help of the latter, I very carefully studied the feebly deviated part of the spectrum. The prism was arranged so that the angle of incidence was 20°; for each radiation, the deviation was measured and the refractive index deduced; then the wave-length was determined by means of a Brunner grating of 200 lines to the millimetre, by the process already described (see p. 57). The following table gives the numbers which result from this study, and were used for constructing the diagram (Fig. 10), in which the abscissæ stand for the wave-lengths and the ordinates for the indices diminished by unity.

Nature of

the rays. Indices. Wave-lengths.

N1 1.004 0.003

N 1.0064 0.0048

N1 1.0096 0.0056

N 1.011 0.0067

N1 1.0125 0.0074

N 1.029 0.0083

N 1.041 0.0081

Each of the divisions marked on the axis of abscissae corresponds to 0.001, and each of the divisions marked on the ordinate axis corresponds to an excess over unity equal to 0.01.

In spite of all the care with which the experiments were executed, the deviations are so small, and, consequently, the indices so near to unity, that the table and diagram can only be regarded as a preliminary indication of the behaviour of the dispersion in the very slightly deviated part of the spectrum. An important consequence arises from these measures, viz. points corresponding to "N" rays, and those corresponding to N1 rays, are all situate on the same curve, within the limits of experimental error. The study of radiations still less refrangible than those I have dwelt on appeared to me impracticable. To avoid confusion, I was obliged to adopt a very large scale for the ordinates; this is why I could not plot on the diagram the results of my former measurements of the more refrangible "N" rays (loc. cit.). These results give points situated on a branch of the curve, starting from the topmost point on the right, and rising almost vertically, with a feeble inclination, from bottom to top, and from right to left, and a slight convexity turned upwards.

Certain sources seem to emit N1 rays exclusively, or, at least, these rays predominate in the emission. This is the case with copper and silver wire, and with hard-drawn platinum wire. M. Bichat has observed that ethylic ether, when brought to the state of forced extension, by the process discovered by M. Berthelot, emits N1 rays. When this state of strain ceases, whether spontaneously or under the action of a slight blow, the emission of N1 rays immediately disappears.



N1 rays can be stored up like "N" rays. For instance, one need only bring a bit of stretched copper wire in proximity to a lump of quartz to make the quartz emit N1 rays for some time after.





On Peculiarities presented by the Action exercised by "N" Rays on a Dimly Lighted Surface (February 2, 1904).



Consider a phosphorescent screen, or, more generally, a dimly lighted surface. If this surface is viewed normally, one notices that the action of "N" rays is to render it more luminous; if, on the contrary, the surface is viewed very obliquely, nearly tangentially, the action of "N" rays is to render it less luminous. In other words, the action of "N" rays increases the quantity of light normally emitted, while it diminishes the light emitted in a very oblique direction. If one looks at it in an intermediate position, no appreciable effect is observed. This explains the fact, observed in all "N" ray experiments, that only the observer placed exactly in front of the sensitive screen perceives the effect of these rays. It also shows how illusory it would be to try to make an audience witness these experiments: the effects perceived by different persons, depending as they do on their positions with regard to the screen, would certainly be contradictory or imperceptible. The rays I have called N1 rays have an inverse action in all cases to that of "N" rays; they diminish the light emitted normally, and increase the light emitted tangentially. M. Macé de Lepinay (see C. R. t. cxxxviii. p. 77, January 11, 1902) has found that sound vibrations increase the glow of a phosphorescent screen as seen by an observer viewing it normally. I have noticed that if the screen is viewed tangentially, the phosphorescence is seen to decrease under the action of the sound-waves. The action of a magnetic field or of an electromotive force on a feebly luminous surface, discovered by M. C. Gutton (see C. R. t. cxxxviii. p. 268, February 1, 1904), presents the same particularities.

To sum up, in all the above-mentioned actions, the modification undergone by the luminous emission consist in a change in its distribution along the different directions comprised between the normal and the tangent plane to the luminous surface.





On the Comparative Action of Heat and "N" Rays on Phosphorescence (March 14, 1904).



I have recently indicated that, whilst the action of "N" rays increases the quantity of light emitted by a phosphorescent screen in a normal direction, it diminishes the quantity of light emitted very obliquely (see the preceding communication). As is well known, heat also acts on phosphorescence, whose brilliancy it temporarily increases. When investigating whether this action of heat offered the same peculiarities as that of "N" rays, with regard to the direction of the emitted light, I found that, on the contrary, heat produces an increase in brilliancy in all directions comprised between the normal and the tangent plane. Hence we are in a position to distinguish between the effects produced on phosphorescence by heat on the one hand, and by "N" rays, sound-waves, magnetic and electric fields on the other.

The following is another case in which the effects are different. Take a rectangular cardboard screen, 5 cms. high and 12 cms. long, for instance, coated very uniformly with calcium sulphide, and rendered very feebly phosphorescent. If the temperature of a portion of the screen is raised, this part becomes more luminous than the rest. If, instead of this, we let fall on one half of the screen a pencil of "N" rays, proceeding, for example, from a Nernst lamp, we find no sensible increase in its glow; but if in front of this half-screen a small opaque object is placed, for instance, a small key or a bit of metal foil, cut off by daylight, this is seen to come out very strongly on the luminous background, while if it is placed on the half not receiving the "N" rays, its outline is vague and indeterminate, and seems even to disappear at times. By shifting slowly the object on the screen, its passage from one half-screen to the other is rendered visible by the change in the boldness of its outline. If instead of viewing the object normally, we observed it very obliquely, the phenomena are reversed. These are striking experiments.





Complementary Notes.



(1) As mentioned in the Preliminary Notice and as will be seen in the later communications, the properties attributed in the present paper to "X" rays, belong not to these rays, but to a new kind of rays, to which I have given the name of "N" rays. The experiments are correct, and the rectification only applies to the nature of the rays which have been studied.

(2) What I attributed then to "S" rays is, in reality, due to diffused "N" rays. The rotation of the plane of polarization of "N" rays by active substances is perhaps very great, since their wave-lengths are very small. It may be, then, that the angles I have observed are merely the remainders obtained by subtracting 360° once or several times from the real rotations. For the same reason, the rotations in a contrary direction could be apparent only. Investigation on this point remains still to be carried out; the operations should be conducted successively on each of the homogeneous pencils resulting from the dispersion of a pencil of "N" rays by an aluminium prism. The existence of magnetic rotatory polarization has recently been shown by M. H. Bagard, whose investigations are still in progress. (C. R. t. cxxxviii.)

(3) Unpolished mica arrests a pencil of "N" rays; these are not, however, absorbed, but only diffused, as in the case of light.

(4) Rock-salt is in reality transparent. What had at first misled me was that the plate of salt I used, having been sawn out of a large block, had remained unpolished. In this state it was only translucent, whether for "N" rays or for light. When polished with wet paper, it becomes transparent both for "N" rays and light; when the polish disappears, it becomes translucent again.



(5) As I state in the text, these rough data on the transparency of different substances will have to be completed by new experiments methodically conducted. I have since found that copper continues to transmit "N" rays emitted by a Nernst lamp, even when used in thicknesses of 65 cms.; that, similarly, glass is very transparent, etc. M. Bichat has studied the transparency of various bodies; in particular, he has ascertained that the opacity of a sheet of lead is due to the fact that it is superficially covered with oxide and carbonate. Metallic lead lets pass certain of the "N" radiations. (See C. R. t. cxxxviii. p. 548, February 29, 1904.)

(6) See the communications of May 25 and June 15, 1903.

(7) I have since found that, on the contrary, "N" rays have much shorter wave-lengths than those of light. (See my communication of January 18, 1904 (p. 53 of the present volume).)

(8) See note above (7).

(9) The phosphorescence may be intense, provided it be not at its maximum.

(10) The piece of gold must of course be also receiving the "N" rays.

(11) These researches have since been communicated to the Academy of Sciences. (See C. R. t. cxxxvii. p. 1049, December 24, 1903.)

(12) According to some experiments which I have made with an aluminium lens on rays issuing from a knife-blade, these should have very large indices. M. Charpentier has found that wet cardboard transmits these rays. These questions remain to be studied.





Instructions for Making Phosphorescent Screens adapted for the Observation of "N" Rays



(1) If one proposes only to ascertain the production of "N" rays in given circumstances, a phosphorescent screen, made as follows, may be used with advantage: some powdered calcium sulphide is mixed with collodion, diluted with ether, so as to form a very thin paste; then, with a water-colour brush, drops of this paste are painted on blackened cardboard, so as to produce stains several millimetres in diameter, close to each other. The screen then presents the aspect of a spotted fabric. If, after being exposed to light, it is examined in a dark room, and in perfect silence, some of the spots will appear less luminous than the others. Usually, some will not seem to be sharply separated from their neighbours, but will form a sort of confused nebula less visible than the rest. Now, if one speaks aloud or whistles, or if a knife, or a slightly bent stick, or the clenched fist, etc., be brought near to the cardboard, all the spots will become distinct and more luminous; the nebula resolves itself. When the rays are suppressed, the screen resumes its former aspect.

(2) To obtain large, uniformly luminous screens, the process is similar to the one adopted for painting in Indian ink; a coating of the mixture of sulphide and collodium, made very thin by the addition of ether, is spread out as uniformly as possible with a water-colour brush. When this layer is dry, a second is applied, and so on until the screen appears uniformly luminous. The thinner the coatings, and the greater their number, the better the result.

(3) To measure the refractive indices and wave-lengths, I use very narrow slits filled with calcium sulphide. Two rectangular plates of aluminium are placed side by side on a small board, so that their edges are in contact. A little of the metal was previously filed off one plate, so that when the plates were in position, a slit was formed between them 2 cms. long and only about mm. broad. A recess has first been made in the board, just where the slit lies, so that the latter is free on both sides. The two plates being first brought within a small distance of each other, some powdered calcium sulphide is packed in between them, after which they are pressed against each other, and maintained with screws, which keep them in contact with the board. The compressed sulphide remains in the slit, and is exposed to sunlight, after the excess has been removed. An extremely narrow phosphorescent slit is thus obtained.





How the Action of "N" Rays should be observed



It is indispensable in these experiments to avoid all strain on the eye, all effort, whether visual or for eye accommodation, and in no way to try to fix the eye upon the luminous source, whose variations in glow one wishes to ascertain. On the contrary, one must, so to say, see the source without looking at it, and even direct one's glance vaguely in a neighbouring direction. The observer must play an absolutely passive part, under penalty of seeing nothing. Silence should be observed as much as possible. Any smoke, and especially tobacco smoke, must be carefully avoided, as being liable to perturb or even entirely to mask the effect of the "N" rays. When viewing the screen or luminous object, no attempt at eye-accommodation should be made. In fact, the observer should accustom himself to look at the screen just as a painter, and in particular an "impressionist" painter, would look at a landscape. To attain this requires some practice, and is not an easy task. Some people, in fact, never succeed.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

Einstein95

ShakespeareFan00

Kges1901

Albert Micah Hang

Vanished Account Byeznhpyxeuztibuo

Kathleen.wright5

Astropilot11

John Carter

TheresNoTime

Simon Peter Hughes

Ixfd64

MJL

Beeswaxcandle

Samwilson

Sp1nd01

FALVES

HelicopterLlama

AuFCL

SwiftyPeep

Prosody

AnnieA1954

John Vandenberg

Billinghurst

R. J. Mathar

Robot Monk

Masur

Jarekt

Rocket000

Zscout370

Boris23

Abu badali~commonswiki

Kyle the hacker

Cumulus

Noclip~commonswiki

Ö

Latebird

Auralux

Waldyrious

Dbenbenn

Jacobolus

Indolences

Technion

Dha

Abigor

Reisio

Blurpeace

Dschwen

Steinsplitter

KABALINI

Bromskloss

Tene~commonswiki

AzaToth

Bender235

PatríciaR





<EOS>